Title: Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities

1
Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications,
Challenges and Opportunities
Carole-Jean Wu, Ramya Raghavendra, Udit Gupta, Bilge Acun, Newsha Ardalani, Kiwan Maeng,
Gloria Chang, Fiona Aga Behram, James Huang, Charles Bai, Michael Gschwind, Anurag Gupta, Myle Ott,
Anastasia Melnikov, Salvatore Candido, David Brooks, Geeta Chauhan, Benjamin Lee, Hsien-Hsin S. Lee,
Bugra Akyildiz, Maximilian Balandat, Joe Spisak, Ravi Jain, Mike Rabbat, Kim Hazelwood
Facebook AI
Abstract —This paper explores the environmental impact of
the super-linear growth trends for AI from a holistic perspective,
spanning Data ,Algorithms , and System Hardware . We character-
ize the carbon footprint of AI computing by examining the model
development cycle across industry-scale machine learning use
cases and, at the same time, considering the life cycle of system
hardware. Taking a step further, we capture the operational and
manufacturing carbon footprint of AI computing and present an
end-to-end analysis for what and how hardware-software design
and at-scale optimization can help reduce the overall carbon
footprint of AI. Based on the industry experience and lessons
learned, we share the key challenges and chart out important
development directions across the many dimensions of AI. We
hope the key messages and insights presented in this paper
can inspire the community to advance the ﬁeld of AI in an
environmentally-responsible manner.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is one of the fastest growing
domains spanning research and product development and
signiﬁcant investment in AI is taking place across nearly every
industry, policy, and academic research. This investment in
AI has also stimulated novel applications in domains such as
science, medicine, ﬁnance, and education. Figure 1 analyzes
the number of papers published within the scientiﬁc disciplines,
illustrating the growth trend in recent years1.
AI plays an instrumental role to push the boundaries of
knowledge and sparks novel, more efﬁcient approaches to
conventional tasks. AI is applied to predict protein structures
radically better than previous methods. It has the potential to
revolutionize biological sciences by providing in-silico methods
for tasks only possible in a physical laboratory setting [ 1]. AI
is demonstrated to achieve human-level conversation tasks,
such as the Blender Bot [ 2], and play games at superhuman
levels, such as AlphaZero [ 3]. AI is used to discover new
electrocatalysts for efﬁcient and scalable ways to store and
utilize renewable energy [ 4], predicting renewable energy
availability in advance to improve energy utilization [ 5],
operating hyperscale data centers efﬁciently [ 6], growing plants
using less natural resources [ 7], and, at the same time, being
used to tackle climate changes [ 8], [9]. It is projected that, in
the next ﬁve years, the market for AI will increase by 10 into
hundreds of billions of dollars [ 10]. All of these investments
1Based on monthly counts, Figure 1 estimates the cumulative number of
papers published per category on the arXiv database.
050100150200250
20112013201520172019Cumulative arXivArticle CountsThousandsAI in Different Disciplines Computer ScienceMathMachine LearningPhysics
Source: arXiv.orgFig. 1. The growth of ML is exceeding that of many other scientiﬁc disciplines.
Signiﬁcant research growth in machine learning is observed in recent years as
illustrated by the increasing cumulative number of papers published in machine
learning with respect to other scientiﬁc disciplines based on the monthly count
(y-axis measures the cumulative number of articles on arXiv).
in research, development, and deployment have led to a super-
linear growth in AI data, models, and infrastructure capacity.
With the dramatic growth of AI, it is imperative to understand
the environmental implications, challenges, and opportunities
of this nascent technology. This is because technologies tend to
create a self-accelerating growth cycle, putting new demands
on the environment.
This work explores the environmental impact of AI from
aholistic perspective. More speciﬁcally, we present the
challenges and opportunities to designing sustainable AI
computing across the key phases of the machine learning (ML)
development process — Data ,Experimentation ,Training , and
Inference — for a variety of AI use cases at Facebook, such
as vision, language, speech, recommendation and ranking. The
solution space spans across our ﬂeet of datacenters and on-
device computing. Given particular use cases, we consider the
impact of AI data,algorithms , and system hardware . Finally,
we consider emissions across the life cycle of hardware systems,
from manufacturing to operational use.
AI Data Growth. In the past decade, we have seen an
exponential increase in AI training data and model capacity.
Figure 2(b) illustrates that the amount of training data at
Facebook for two recommendation use cases — one of the
fastest growing areas of ML usage at Facebook— has increased
by 2.4and 1.9 in the last two years, reaching exabyte scale.
The increase in data size has led to a 3.2 increase in data
ingestion bandwidth demand. Given this increase, data storage
and the ingestion pipeline accounts for a signiﬁcant portion ofarXiv:2111.00364v2  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2022
05101520Model SizeTime(c) Model Growth TrendDLRM Parameter #s00.0050.010.0150.020.0250.030.035
051015202530354045
0.1101000Absolute AUC ImprovementBLEU ScoreModel Size (Billions of Parameters in Log Scale)(a) 1000x Model Size ScalingGPT English2FrenchGPT French2EnglishRecSys SearchRecSys Images
xxxxx
2019-21x0.511.522.533.544.5Data & Ingestion BandwidthTime(b) Data Growth TrendDLRM1 DataDLRM2 DataData Ingestion BW
11.522.53
Yr1-Q1Yr1-Q2Yr1-Q3Yr1-Q4Yr2-Q1Yr2-Q2AI System Capacity(d) System Growth TrendTrainingInference2.9x2.5x20x1,000xFig. 2. Deep learning has witnessed an exponential growth in data, model parameters, and system resources over the recent years. (a) The 1000model size
growth has led to higher model accuracy for various ML tasks. For example, with GPT-3, to increase the model quality BLEU score from 5 to 40 requires a
model 1;000larger in size. (b) At Facebook, the amount of data for recommendation use cases has roughly doubled between 2019 and 2021, leading to 3.2
times increase in the data ingestion bandwidth demand. (c) Facebook’s recommendation and ranking model sizes have increased by 20 times during the same
time period [11]. (d) The explosive growth in AI has driven 2:9and2:5capacity increases for AI training and inference, respectively.
the infrastructure and power capacity compared to ML training
and end-to-end machine learning life cycles.
AI Model Growth. The ever-increasing data volume has also
driven a super-linear trend in model size growth. Figure 2(a) de-
picts the 1000model size increase for GPT3-based language
translation tasks [ 12], [13], whereas for Baidu’s search engine,
the model of 1000larger in size improves accuracy in AUC
by 0.030. Despite small, the accuracy improvement can lead
to signiﬁcantly higher-quality search outcomes [ 14]. Similarly,
Figure 2(c) illustrates that between 2019 and 2021, the size
of recommendation models at Facebook has increased by
20[15], [16], [17], [11]. Despite the large increase in model
sizes, the memory capacity of GPU-based AI accelerators,
e.g. 32GB (NVIDIA V100, 2018) to 80GB (NVIDIA A100,
2021), has increased by <2every 2 years. The resource
requirements for strong AI scaling clearly outpaces that of
system hardware.
AI Infrastructure Growth. The strong performance scaling
demand for ML motivates a variety of scale-out solutions [ 11],
[18] by leveraging parallelism at scale with a massive collection
of training accelerators. Figure 2(d) illustrates that the explosive
growth in AI use cases at Facebook has driven 2:9increase
in AI training infrastructure capacity over the 1.5 years. In
addition, we observe trillions of inference per day across
Facebook’s data centers—more than doubling in the past 3
years. The increase in inference demands has also led to an
2:5increase in AI inference infrastructure capacity. Last but
not least, the carbon footprint of AI goes beyond its operational
energy consumption. The embodied carbon footprint of systems
is becoming a dominating factor for AI’s overall environmental
impact (Section III) [19].
The Elephant in the Room. Despite the positive societal
beneﬁts [ 20], the endless pursuit of achieving higher model
quality has led to the exponential scaling of AI with signiﬁcant
energy and environmental footprint implications. Although
recent work shows the carbon footprint of training one large
ML model, such as Meena [21], is equivalent to 242,231 miles
driven by an average passenger vehicle [ 22], this is only one
aspect; to fully understand the real environmental impact we
must consider the AI ecosystem holistically going forward —
beyond looking at model training alone and by accountingfor both operational and embodied carbon footprint of AI.
We must look at the ML pipeline end-to-end: data collection,
model exploration and experimentation, model training, model
optimization and run-time inference. The frequency of training
andscale of each stage of the ML development cycle matter.
From the systems perspective, the life cycle of ML software
and system hardware, including manufacturing and operational
use, must also be considered.
Optimizing across ML pipelines and systems life cycles end-
to-end is a complex and challenging task. While training large,
sparsely-activated neural networks improves model scalability,
achieving higher accuracy at lower operational energy foot-
print [ 21], it can incur higher embodied carbon footprint from
the increase in the system resource requirement. Shifting model
training and inference to data centers with carbon-free energy
can reduce emissions; however, this approach may not scale to
a broad set of use cases. Infrastructure for carbon-free energy
is limited by factors such as geography and available materials
(e.g. rare metals), and takes signiﬁcant economic resources and
time to build. In addition, as on-device learning becomes more
ubiquitously adopted to improve data privacy, we can see more
computation being shifted away from data centers to the edge,
where access to renewable energy is limited.
A Holistic Approach. This paper is the ﬁrst to take a holistic
approach to characterize the environmental footprint of AI
computing from experimentation and training toinference .
We characterize the carbon footprint of AI computing by
examining the model development cycle across industry-scale
machine learning use cases at Facebook (Section II). This is
illustrated by the more than 800 operational carbon footprint
reduction achieved through judicious hardware-software co-
design for a Transformer-based universal language model.
Taking a step further, we present an end-to-end analysis for
both operational andembodied carbon footprint for AI training
and inference (Section III). Based on the industry experience
and lessons learned, we chart out opportunities and important
development directions across the dimensions of AI including —
data, algorithm, systems, metrics, standards, and best practices
(Section IV). We hope the key messages (Section VI) and the
insights in this paper can inspire the community to advance
the ﬁeld of AI in an environmentally-responsible manner.
2
ExperimentationTrainingInference
Storage –Network --Compute
ManufacturingTransport Product UseRecycling
Deep Learning Framework & Library
(a) Fleet View(b) Machine Learning Task View [Section 3.1](c) Infrastructure View
-2024681012
20162017201820192020Metric Tons CO2e Millions[Use] Operational (renewable)[Use] Operational Scope 1,2[Manufacturing] Value Chain CO2 Scope 3Carbon Removal0%20%40%60%80%100%DataTraining (Offline)Training (Online/Evaluation)DeploymentRM1Machine Learning Model Development and Deployment Phases [Section 2.1]
System Life Cycle [Section 2.2]
DataData Efficiency[Section 4.1]Resource-Efficient Experimentation, Algorithms, and Model Architectures [Section 4.2]
Efficient, Environmentally-Sustainable AI System Hardware [Section 4.3]Fig. 3. Model Development Phases over AI System Hardware Life Cycle: (a) At Facebook, we observe a rough power capacity breakdown of 10:20:70 for
AI infrastructures devoted to the three key phases — Experimentation ,Training , and Inference ; (b) Considering the primary stages of the ML pipeline
end-to-end, the energy footprint of RM1 is roughly 31:29:40 over Data ,Experimentation/Training , and Inference ; (c) Despite the investment to neutralize
the operational footprint with carbon-free energy, the overall data center electricity use continues to grow, demanding over 7.17 million MWh in 2020 [23].
II. M ODEL DEVELOPMENT PHASES AND AI S YSTEM
HARDWARE LIFECYCLE
Figure 3 depicts the major development phases for ML —
Data Processing ,Experimentation ,Training , and Inference
(Section II-A) — over the life cycle of AI system hardware
(Section II-B). Driven by distinct objectives of AI research
and advanced product development, infrastructure is designed
and built speciﬁcally to maximize data storage and ingestion
efﬁciency for the phase of Data Processing , developer efﬁ-
ciency for the phase of Experimentation , training throughput
efﬁciency for the phase of Training , and tail-latency bounded
throughput efﬁciency for Inference .
A. Machine Learning Model Development Cycle
ML researchers extract features from data during the Data
Processing phase and apply weights to individual features
based on feature importance to the model optimization objective.
During Experimentation , the researchers design, implement
and evaluate the quality of proposed algorithms, model ar-
chitectures, modeling techniques, and/or training methods for
determining model parameters. This model exploration process
is computationally-intensive. A large collection of diverse ML
ideas are explored simultaneously at-scale. Thus, during this
phase, we observe unique system resource requirements from
the large pool of training experiments. Within Facebook’s ML
research cluster, 50% (p50) of ML training experiments take up
to 1.5 GPU days while 99% (p99) of the experiments complete
within 24 GPU days. There are a number of large-scale, trillion
parameter models which require over 500 GPUs days.
Once a ML solution is determined as promising, it moves into
Training where the ML solution is evaluated using extensive
production data — data that is more recent , islarger in quantity ,
and contains richer features . The process often requires
additional hyper-parameter tuning. Depending on the ML task
requirement, the models can be trained/re-trained at differentfrequencies. For example, models supporting Facebook’s Search
service were trained at an hourly cadence whereas the Language
Translation models were trained weekly [ 24]. A p50 production
model training workﬂow takes 2.96 GPU days while a training
workﬂow at p99 can take up to 125 GPU days.
Finally, for Inference , the best-performing model is de-
ployed, producing trillions of daily predictions to serve billions
of users worldwide. The total compute cycles for inference
predictions are expected to exceed the corresponding training
cycles for the deployed model.
B. Machine Learning System Life Cycle
Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) is a common methodology to
assess the carbon emissions over the product life cycle. There
are four major phases: manufacturing ,transport ,product use ,
andrecycling2. From the perspective of AI’s carbon footprint
analysis, manufacturing andproduct use are the focus. Thus,
in this work, we consider the overall carbon footprint of
AI by including manufacturing — carbon emissions from
building infrastructures speciﬁcally for AI (i.e., embodied
carbon footprint ) and product use — carbon emissions from
the use of AI (i.e., operational carbon footprint ).
While quantifying the exact breakdown between operational
and embodied carbon footprint is a complex process, we
estimate the signiﬁcance of embodied carbon emissions using
Facebook’s Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission statistics3.In this
case, more than 50% of Facebook’s emissions owe to its value
chain — Scope 3 of Facebook’s GHG emission . As a result,
a signiﬁcant embodied carbon cost is paid upfront for every
system component brought into Facebook’s ﬂeet of datacenters,
where AI is the biggest growth driver.
2Recycling is an important domain, for which the industry is developing
a circular economy model to up-cycle system components — design with
recycling in mind.
3Facebook Sustainability Data: https://sustainability.fb.com/report/2020-sust
ainability-report/.
3
*Training footprint only0.000.501.00LMRM-1RM-2RM-3RM-4RM-5BERT-NASEvolved TransformerT5MeenaGShard-600BSwitch TransformerGPT3FacebookOSS Large-Scale ML ModelsCO2e (kg)MillionsOperational Carbon Footprint of Large-Scale ML TasksOffline TrainingOnline TrainingInferenceFig. 4. The carbon footprint of the LM model is dominated by Inference
whereas, for RM1 – RM5, the carbon footprint of Training versus Inference is
roughly equal. The average carbon footprint for ML training tasks at Facebook
is 1.8 times larger than that of Meena used in modern conversational agents
and 0.3 times of GPT-3’s carbon footprint. Carbon footprint for inference
tasks is included for models that are used in production. Note: the operational
carbon footprint of AI does not correlate with the number of model parameters.
The OSS large-scale ML tasks are based on the vanilla model architectures
from [21] and may not be reﬂective of production use cases.
III. AI C OMPUTING ’SCARBON FOOTPRINT
A. Carbon Footprint Analysis for Industry-Scale ML Training
and Deployment
Figure 4 illustrates the operational carbon emissions for
model training and inference across the ML tasks. We analyze
six representative machine learning models in production
at Facebook4.LM refers to Facebook’s Transformer-based
Universal Language Model for text translation [ 25].RM1 –
RM5 represent ﬁve unique deep learning recommendation and
ranking models for various Facebook products [26], [27].
We compare the carbon footprint of Facebook’s production
ML models with seven large-scale, open-source (OSS) models:
BERT-NAS, T5, Meena, GShard-600B, Switch Transformer,
and GPT-3. Note, we present the operational carbon footprint
of the OSS model training from [ 28], [21]. The operational
carbon footprint results can vary based on the exact AI
systems used and the carbon intensity of the energy mixture.
Models with more parameters do not necessarily result in
longer training time nor higher carbon emissions. Training
the Switch Transformer model equipped with 1.5 trillion
parameters [ 29] produces signiﬁcantly less carbon emission
than that of GPT-3 (750 billion parameters) [ 13]. This illustrates
the carbon footprint advantage of operationally-efﬁcient model
architectures.
4In total, the six models account for a vast majority of compute resources
for the overall inference predictions at Facebook, serving billions of users
world wide.
00.20.40.60.811.21.4
LMRM-1RM-2RM-3RM-4RM-5CO2e (kg)MillionsOverall Carbon Footprint of Large-Scale ML TasksOperational Carbon Cost (Offset with solar)Operational Carbon Cost (Rest)Projected Embodied Carbon Costcarbon-free energyFig. 5. When considering the overall life cycle of ML models and systems in
this analysis, manufacturing carbon cost is roughly 50% of the (location-based)
operational carbon footprint of large-scale ML tasks (Figure 4). Taking into
account carbon-free energy, such as solar, the operational energy consumption
can be signiﬁcantly reduced, leaving the manufacturing carbon cost as the
dominating source of AI’s carbon footprint.
Both Training andInference can contribute signiﬁcantly to the
overall carbon footprint of machine learning tasks at Facebook.
The exact breakdown between the two phases varies across
ML use cases.
The overall operational carbon footprint is categorized into
ofﬂine training ,online training , and inference . Ofﬂine training
encompasses both experimentation and training models with
historical data. Online training is particularly relevant to
recommendation models where parameters are continuously
updated based on recent data. The inference footprint represents
the emission from serving production trafﬁc. The online training
and inference emissions are considered over the period of
ofﬂine training. For recommendation use cases, we ﬁnd the
carbon footprint is split evenly between training and inference.
On the other hand, the carbon footprint of LM is dominated
by the inference phase, using much higher inference resources
(65%) as compared to training (35%).
Both operational and embodied carbon emissions can con-
tribute signiﬁcantly to the overall footprint of ML tasks .
Operational Carbon Footprint: Across the life cycle of
the Facebook models shown in Figure 4, the average carbon
footprint is 1.8 higher than that of the open-source Meena
model [ 30] and one-third of GPT-3’s training footprint. To
quantify the emissions of Facebook’s models we measure
the total energy consumed, assume location-based carbon
intensities for energy mixes,5and use a data center Power
Usage Effectiveness (PUE) of 1.1. In addition to model-level
and hardware-level optimizations, Facebook’s renewable energy
procurement [23] programs mitigates these emissions.
Embodied Carbon Footprint: To quantify the embodied
carbon footprint of AI hardware, we use LCA (Section II-B).
We assume GPU-based AI training systems have similar
5Renewable energy and sustainability programs of Facebook [23].
4
0%5%10%15%20%25%Operational PowerFootprint Improvement Normalized to Overall AI Infrastructure2-year time periodOptimization is an Iterative Process
ModelPlatformInfrastructureHardwarePerformance-per-Watt[Moore’s Law]Performance-per-Watt[Domain-Specific Acceleration]Utilization[At-Scale Data Center Optimization;Low-Precision Hardware]Resource-Efficient AI Models[Figure 8]Fig. 6. Optimization is an iterative process — we have achieved an average of
20% operational energy footprint reduction every 6 months across the machine
learning hardware-software stack.
embodied footprint as the production footprint of Apple’s 28-
core CPU with dual AMD Radeon GPUs (2000kg CO 2) [31].
For CPU-only systems, we assume half the embodied emissions.
Based on the characterization of model training and inference at
Facebook, we assume an average utilization of 30-60% over the
3- to 5-year lifetime for servers. Figure 5 presents the overall
carbon footprint for the large scale ML tasks at Facebook,
spanning both operational and embodied carbon footprint.
Based on the assumptions of location-based renewable energy
availability, the split between the embodied and (location-
based) operational carbon footprint is roughly 30% / 70%
for the large scale ML tasks. Taking into account carbon-free
energy, such as solar, the operational carbon footprint can be
signiﬁcantly reduced, leaving the manufacturing carbon cost
as the dominating source of AI’s carbon footprint.
B. Carbon Footprint Optimization from Hardware-Software
Co-Design
Optimization is an iterative process — we reduce the power
footprint across the machine learning hardware-software stack
by 20% every 6 months. But at the same time, AI infrastructure
continued to scale out. The net effect, with Jevon’s Paradox, is
a 28.5% operational power footprint reduction over two years
(Figure 8).
Optimization across AI Model Development and System
Stack over Time: Figure 6 shows the operational power
footprint reduction across Facebook’s AI ﬂeet over two years.
The improvement come from four areas of optimizations:
model (e.g., designing resource-efﬁcient models), platform
(e.g., PyTorch’s support for quantization), infrastructure (e.g.,
data center optimization and low-precision hardware), and
hardware (e.g., domain-speciﬁc acceleration). Each bar illus-
trates the operational power reduction across Facebook’s AI
ﬂeet over 6-month period from each of the optimization areas.
The optimizations in aggregate provide, on average, a 20%
reduction in operational power consumption every six months.
81012112511101001,000
CPU BaselineCPU DataManagementGPU FP32GPU FP16FasterTransformerOperational Power Footprint Normalized to Optimized Transformer on GPUs 
Platform-Level CachingGPU AcceleratorsNumerical OptimizationPlatform+ Hardware +Algorithm810 x
OptimizedTransformerFig. 7. For the cross-lingual ML task (LM), the operational energy footprint
can be signiﬁcantly reduced by more than 800using platform-level caching ,
GPUs ,low precision data format , and additional algorithmic optimization .
The compounded beneﬁts highlight the need for cross-stack
optimizations.
Optimizing the Carbon Footprint of LMs: We dive
into a speciﬁc machine learning task at Facebook: language
translation using a Transformer-based architecture ( LM).LM
is designed based on the state-of-the-art cross-lingual un-
derstanding through self-supervision. Figure 7 analyzes the
power footprint improvements over a collection of optimization
steps for LM:platform-level caching ,GPU acceleration ,low
precision format on accelerator , and model optimization . In
aggregate the optimizations reduce the infrastructure resources
required to serve LMat scale by over 800 . We outline the
optimization beneﬁts from each area below.
Platform-Level Caching. Starting with a CPU server
baseline, application-level caching improves power efﬁ-
ciency by 6.7 . These improvements are a result of pre-
computing and caching frequently accessed embeddings
for language translation tasks. Using DRAM and Flash
storage devices as caches, these pre-computed embeddings
can be shared across applications and use cases.
GPU acceleration. In addition to caching, deploying LM
across GPU-based specialized AI hardware unlocks an
additional 10.1 energy efﬁciency improvement.
Algorithmic optimization. Finally, algorithmic optimiza-
tions provide an additional 12 energy efﬁciency re-
duction. Halving precision (e.g., going from 32-bit to
16-bit operations) provides a 2.4 energy efﬁciency
improvement on GPUs. Another 5 energy efﬁciency gain
can be achieved by using custom operators to schedule
encoding steps within a single kernel of the Transformer
module, such as [32].
Optimizing the Carbon Footprint of RMs: The LM
analysis is used as an example to highlight the optimiza-
tion opportunities available with judicious cross-stack, hard-
ware/software optimization. In addition to optimizing the
carbon footprint for the language translation task, we describe
additional optimization techniques tailored for ranking and
5
Performance-per-Watt[Domain-Specific Acceleration]Utilization[At-Scale Data Center Optimization;Low-Precision Hardware]0.80.911.11.21.3
Yr1-H1Yr1-H2Yr2-H1Yr2-H2Operational Power FootprintBaselineOptimized (Section 3.2)28.5% improvement Fig. 8. The iterative optimization process has led to 28.5% operational energy
footprint reduction over the two-year time period (Section III-B ). Despite the
signiﬁcant operational power footprint reduction, we continue to see the overall
electricity demand for AI to increase over time — an example of Jevon’s
Paradox , where efﬁciency improvement stimulates additional novel AI use
cases.
recommendation use cases.
A major infrastructure challenge faced by deep learning
RM training and deployment ( RM1 –RM5 ) is the fast-rising
memory capacity and bandwidth demands (Figure 2). There are
two primary sub-nets in a RM: the dense fully-connected (FC)
network and the sparse embedding-based network. The FC
network is constructed with multi-layer perceptions (MLPs),
thus computationally-intensive. The embedding network is used
to project hundreds of sparse, high-dimensional features to low-
dimension vectors. It can easily contribute to over 95% of the
total model size. For a number of important recommendation
and ranking use cases, the embedding operation dominates the
inference execution time [27], [33].
To tackle the signiﬁcant memory capacity and bandwidth
requirement, we deploy model quantization for RMs [ 34].
Quantization offers two primary efﬁciency beneﬁts: the low-
precision data representation reduces the amount of compu-
tation requirement and, at the same time, lowers the overall
memory capacity need. By converting 32-bit ﬂoating-point
numerical representation to 16-bit, we can reduce the overall
RM2 model size by 15%. This has led to 20.7% reduction in
memory bandwidth consumption. Furthermore, the memory
capacity reduction enabled by quantization unblocks novel
systems with lower on-chip memory. For example, for RM1,
quantization has enabled RM deployment on highly power-
efﬁcient systems with smaller on-chip memory, leading to an
end-to-end inference latency improvement of 2.5 times.
C. Machine Learning Infrastructures at Scale
ML Accelerators: GPUs are the de-facto training acceler-
ators at Facebook, contributing to signiﬁcant power capacity
investment in the context of Facebook’s ﬂeet of datacenters.
However, GPUs can be severely under-utilized during both the
ML Experimentation and Training phases (Figure 10) [ 35]. To
amortize the upfront embodied carbon cost of every accelerator
deployed into Facebook’s datacenters, maximizing accelerator
utilization is a must.
Efﬁciency of Scale: The higher throughput performance
density achieved with ML accelerators reduces the total number
of processors deployed into datacenter racks. This leads tomore effective amortization of shared infrastructure overheads.
Furthermore, datacenter capacity is not only limited by physical
space but also power capacity — higher operational power
efﬁciency directly reduces the inherited carbon cost from
manufacturing of IT infrastructures and datacenter buildings.
At-Scale Efﬁciency Optimization for Facebook Data
Centers: Servers in Facebook data center ﬂeets are customized
for internal workloads only — machine learning tasks [ 24]
or not [ 36], [37]. Compared to public cloud providers, this
puts Facebook at a unique position for at-scale resource man-
agement design and optimization. First, Facebookcustomizes
server SKUs — compute, memcached, storage tiers and ML
accelerators — to maximize performance and power efﬁciency.
Achieving a Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE) of about 1.10,
Facebook’s data centers are about 40% more efﬁcient than
small-scale, typical data centers.
Furthermore, the large-scale deployment of servers of
different types provides an opportunity to build performance
measurement and optimization tools to ensure high utilization of
the underlying infrastructure. For data center ﬂeets in different
geographical regions where the actual server utilization exhibits
a diurnal pattern, Auto-Scaling frees the over-provisioned
capacity during off-peak hours, by up to 25% of the web
tier’s machines [ 38]. By doing so, it provides opportunistic
server capacity for others to use, including ofﬂine ML training.
Furthermore, static power consumption plays a non-trivial role
in the context of the overall data center electricity footprint.
This motivates more effective processor idle state management.
Carbon-Free Energy: Finally, over the past years, Face-
bookhas invested in carbon free energy sources to neutralize its
operational carbon footprint [ 23]. Reaching net zero emissions
entails matching every unit of energy consumed by data
centers with 100% renewable energy purchased by Facebook.
Remaining emissions are offset with various sustainability
programs, further reducing the operational carbon footprint of
AI computing at Facebook. As Section IV-C will later show,
more can be done .
D. Going Beyond Efﬁciency Optimization
Despite the opportunities for optimizing energy efﬁciency
and reducing environmental footprint at scale, there are many
reasons why we must care about scaling AI in a more
environmentally-sustainable manner. AI growth is multiplicative
beyond current industrial use cases. Although domain-speciﬁc
architectures improve the operational energy footprint of AI
model training by more than 90% [ 21], these architectures
require more system resources, leading to larger embodied
carbon footprints.
While shifting model training and inference to data centers
with carbon-free energy sources can reduce emissions, the
solution may not scale to all AI use cases. Infrastructure for
carbon free energy is limited by rare metals and materials,
and takes signiﬁcant economic resources and time to build.
Furthermore, the carbon footprint of federated learning and
optimization use cases at the edge is estimated to be similar to
that of training a Transformer Big model (Figure 11). As on-
device learning becomes more ubiquitously adopted to improve
6
02468
20%30%50%75%LM Carbon Footprint(Normalized to 75%)GPU UtilizationEmbodiedOperational (rest)Operational (offset w/ solar)Fig. 9. As accelerator utilization improves over time, both operational and
embodied carbon footprints of AI improve. Carbon-free energy helps reduce
the operational carbon footprint, making embodied carbon cost the dominating
factor. To reduce the rising carbon footprint of AI computing at-scale, we must
complement efﬁciency and utilization optimization with novel approaches to
reduce the remaining embodied carbon footprint of AI systems.
data privacy, we expect to see more computation being shifted
away from data centers to the edge, where access to renewable
energy may be limited. The edge-cloud space for AI poses
interesting design opportunities (Section IV-C).
The growth of AI in all dimensions outpaces the efﬁciency im-
provement at-scale. Figure 9 illustrates that, as GPU utilization
is improved (x-axis) for LM training on GPUs, both embodied
and operational carbon emissions will reduce. Increasing GPU
utilization up to 80%, the overall carbon footprint decreases
by 3. Powering AI services with renewable energy sources
can further reduce the overall carbon footprint by a factor of 2.
Embodied carbon cost becomes the dominating source of AI’s
overall carbon footprint. To curb the rising carbon footprint
of AI computing at-scale (Figure 8 and Figure 9), we must
look beyond efﬁciency optimization and complement efﬁciency
and utilization optimization with efforts to tackle the remaining
embodied carbon footprint of AI systems.
IV. A S USTAINABILITY MINDSET FOR AI
To tackle the environmental implications of AI’s exponential
growth (Figure 2), the ﬁrst key step requires ML practitioners
and researchers to develop and adopt an sustainability mindset .
The solution space is wide open—while there are signiﬁcant
efforts looking at AI system and infrastructure efﬁciency opti-
mization, the AI data, experimentation, and training algorithm
efﬁciency space (Sections IV-A and IV-B ) beyond system
design and optimization (Section IV-C ) is less well explored.
We cannot optimize what cannot be measured — telemetry to
track the carbon footprint of AI technologies must be adopted
by the community (Section V-A). We synthesize a number of
important directions to scale AI in a sustainable manner and to
minimize the environmental impact of AI for the next decades.
The ﬁeld of AI is currently primarily driven by research that
seeks to maximize model accuracy — progress is often used
synonymously with improved prediction quality. This endless
pursuit of higher accuracy over the decade of AI research has
signiﬁcant implications in computational resource requirement
and environmental footprint. To develop AI technologies
responsibly, we must achieve competitive model accuracy at a
ﬁxed or even reduced computational and environmental cost .
Despite the recent calls-to-action [ 28], [39], [40], [41], [21], theoverall community remains under-invested in research that aims
at deeply understanding and minimizing the cost of AI. We
conjecture the factors that may have contributed to the current
state in Appendix A. To bend the exponential growth curve
of AI and its environmental footprint, we must build a future
where efﬁciency is an evaluation criterion for publishing ML
research on computationally-intensive models beyond accuracy-
related measures.
A. Data Utilization Efﬁciency
Data Scaling and Sampling: No data is like more data
— data scaling is the de-facto approach to increase model
quality, where the primary factor for accuracy improvement
is driven by the size and quality of training data, instead of
algorithmic optimization. However, data scaling has signiﬁcant
environmental footprint implications. To keep the model
training time manageable, overall system resources must be
scaled with the increase in the data set size, resulting in larger
embodied carbon footprint and operational carbon footprint
from the data storage and ingestion pipeline and model training.
Alternatively, if training system resources are kept ﬁxed, data
scaling increases training time, resulting in a larger operational
energy footprint.
When designed well, however, data scaling, sampling and
selection strategies can improve the competitive analysis for ML
algorithms, reducing the environmental footprint of the process
(Appendix A). For instance, Sachdeva et al. demonstrated that
intelligent data sampling with merely 10% of data sub-samples
can effectively preserve the relative ranking performance
of different recommendation algorithms [ 42]. This ranking
performance is achieved with an average of 5.8 times execution
time speedup, leading to signiﬁcant operating carbon footprint
reduction.
Data Perishability: Understanding key characteristics of
data is fundamental to efﬁcient data utilization for AI applica-
tions. Not all data is created equal and data collected over time
loses its predictive value gradually. Understanding the rate at
which data loses its predictive value has strong implications on
the resulting carbon footprint. For example, natural language
data sets can lose half of their predictive value in the time
period of less than 7 years (the half-life time of data) [ 43]. The
exact half-life period is a function of context. If we were able
to predict the half-life time of data, we can devise effective
sampling strategies to subset data at different rates based on
its half-life. By doing so, the resource requirement for the data
storage and ingestion pipeline can be signiﬁcantly reduced [ 44]
— lower training time (operational carbon footprint) as well as
storage needs (embodied carbon footprint).
B. Experimentation and Training Efﬁciency
The experimentation and training phases are closely coupled
(Section II). There is a natural trade-off between the investment
in experimentation and the subsequent training cost (Section III).
Neural architecture search (NAS) and hyperparameter op-
timization (HPO) are techniques that automate the design
space exploration. Despite their capability to discover higher-
performing neural networks, NAS and HPO can be extremely
7
resource-intensive, involving training many models, especially
when using simple approaches. Strubell et al. show that grid-
search NAS can incur over 3000environmental footprint
overhead [ 28]. Utilizing much more sample-efﬁcient NAS and
HPO methods [ 45], [46] can translate directly into carbon
footprint improvement. In addition to reducing the number of
training experiments, one can also reduce the training time of
each experiment. By detecting and stopping under-performing
training workﬂows early , unnecessary training cycles can be
eliminated.
Multi-objective optimization explores the Pareto frontier of
efﬁcient model quality and system resource trade-offs. If used
early in the model exploration process, it enables more informed
decisions about which model to train fully and deploy given
certain infrastructure capacity. Beyond model accuracy and
timing performance [ 47], [48], [49], [50], energy and carbon
footprint can be directly incorporated into the cost function as
optimization objectives to enable discovery of environmentally-
friendly models. Furthermore, when training is decoupled from
NAS, sub-networks tailoring to specialized system hardware
can be selected without additional training [51], [52], [53], [54].
Such approaches can signiﬁcantly reduce the overall training
time, however, at the expense of increased embodied carbon
footprint.
Developing resource-efﬁcient model architectures funda-
mentally reduce the overall system capacity need of ML
tasks. From the systems perspective, accelerator memory
is scarce. However, DNNs, such as neural recommendation
models, require signiﬁcantly higher memory capacity and
bandwidth [ 55], [33]. This motivates researchers to develop
memory-efﬁcient model architectures. For example, the Tensor-
Train compression technique (TT-Rec) achieves more than
100memory capacity reduction with negligible training time
and accuracy trade-off [ 56]. Similarly, the design space trade-
off between memory capacity requirement, training time, and
model accuracy is also explored in Deep Hash Embedding
(DHE) [ 57]. While training time increases lead to higher
operational carbon footprint, in the case of TT-Rec and DHE,
the memory-efﬁcient model architectures require signiﬁcantly
lower memory capacity while better utilizing the computational
capability of training accelerators, resulting in lower embodied
carbon footprint.
Developing efﬁcient training algorithms is a long-time
objective of research in optimization and numerical meth-
ods [ 58]. Evaluations of optimization methods should account
forallexperimentation efforts required to tune optimizer
hyperparameters, not just the method performance after tun-
ing [ 59], [60]. In addition, signiﬁcant research has gone
into algorithmic approaches to efﬁciently scale training [ 61],
[62] by reducing communication cost via compression [ 63],
[64], pipelining [ 65], and sharding [ 66], [67]. The advances
have enabled efﬁcient scaling to larger models and larger
datasets. We expect efﬁcient training methods to continue
as an important domain. While this paper has focused on
supervised learning relying labeled data, algorithmic efﬁciency
extends to other learning paradigms including self-supervised
and semi-supervised learning (Appendix C).
Probability           GPU Utilization           Fig. 10. A vast majority of model experimentation (over tens of thousands of
training workﬂows) utilizes GPUs at only 30-50%, leaving room for utilization
and efﬁciency improvements.
C. Efﬁcient, Environmentally-Sustainable AI Infrastructure and
System Hardware
To amortize the embodied carbon footprint, model developers
and system architects must maximize the utilization of acceler-
ator and system resources when in use and prolong the lifetime
of AI infrastructures . Existing practices such as the move to
domain-speciﬁc architectures at cloud scale [ 68], [69], [70]
reduce AI computing’s footprint by consolidating computing
resources at scale and by operating the shared infrastructures
more environmentally-friendly with carbon free energy6.
Accelerator Virtualization and Multi-Tenancy Support:
Figure 10 illustrates the utilization of GPU accelerators in Face-
book’s research training infrastructure. A signiﬁcant portion
of machine learning model experimentation utilizes GPUs at
only 30-50%, leaving signiﬁcant room for improvements to
efﬁciency and overall utilization. Virtualization and workload
consolidation technologies can help maximize accelerator
utilization [ 71]. Google’s TPUs have also recently started
supporting virtualization [ 72]. Multi-tenancy for AI accelerators
is gaining traction as an effective way to improve resource
utilization, thereby amortizing the upfront embodied carbon
footprint of customized system hardware for AI at the expense
of potential operational carbon footprint increase [ 73], [74],
[75], [76], [77].
Environmental Sustainability as a Key AI System Design
Principle: Today, servers are designed to optimize performance
and power efﬁciency. However, system design with a focus
on operational energy efﬁciency optimization does not always
produce the most environmentally-sustainable solution [ 78],
[79], [19]. With the rising embodied carbon cost and the expo-
nential demand growth of AI, system designers and architects
must re-think fundamental system hardware design principles
to minimize computing’s footprint end-to-end, considering the
entire hardware and ML model development life cycle. In
addition to the respective performance, power, and cost proﬁles,
the environmental footprint characteristics of processors over
the generations of CMOS technologies, DDRx and HBM mem-
ory technologies, SSD/NAND-ﬂash/HDD storage technologies
can be orders-of-magnitude different [ 80]. Thus, designing AI
6We discuss additional important directions for building environmentally-
sustainable systems in Appendix B, including datacenter infrastructure
disaggregation; fault tolerant, resilient AI systems.
8
systems with the least environmental impact requires explicit
consideration of environmental footprint characteristics at the
design time.
The Implications of General-Purpose Processors,
General-Purpose Accelerators, Reconﬁgurable Systems,
and ASICs for AI: There is a wide variety of system
hardware choices for AI from general-purpose processors
(CPUs), general-purpose accelerators (GPUs or TPUs), ﬁeld-
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) [ 81], to application-speciﬁc
integrated circuit (ASIC), such as Eyeriss [ 82]. The exact
system deployment choice can be multifaceted — the cadence
of ML algorithm and model architecture evolution, the di-
versity of ML use cases and the respective system resource
requirements, and the maturity of the software stack. While ML
accelerator deployment brings a step-function improvement in
operational energy efﬁciency , it may not necessarily reduce
the carbon footprint of AI computing overall. This is because
of the upfront embodied carbon footprint associated with the
different system hardware choices. From the environmental
sustainability perspective, the optimal point depends on the
compounding factor of operational efﬁciency improvement over
generations of ML algorithms/models, deployment lifetime
and embodied carbon footprint of the system hardware. Thus,
to design for environmental sustainability, one must strike a
careful balance between efﬁciency andﬂexibility and, at the
same time, consider environmental impact as a key design
dimension for next-generation AI systems.
Carbon-Efﬁcient Scheduling for AI Computing At-Scale:
As the electricity consumption of hyperscale data centers
continues to rise, data center operators have devoted signiﬁcant
investment to neutralize operational carbon footprint. By
operating large-scale computing infrastructures with carbon
free energy, technology companies are taking an important step
to address the environmental implications of computing. More
can be done however .
As the renewable energy proportion in the electricity grid
increases, ﬂuctuations in energy generation will increase due to
the intermittent nature of renewable energy sources (i.e. wind,
solar). Elastic carbon-aware workload scheduling techniques
can be used in and across datacenters to predict and exploit
the intermittent energy generation patterns [ 83]. However such
scheduling algorithms might require server over-provisioning
to allow for ﬂexibility of shifting workloads to times when
carbon-free energy is available. Furthermore, any additional
server capacity comes with manufacturing carbon cost which
needs to be incorporated into the design space. Alternatively,
energy storage (e.g. batteries, pumped hydro, ﬂywheels, molten
salt) can be used to store renewable energy during peak
generation times for use during low generation times. There
is an interesting design space to achieve 24/7 carbon-free AI
computing.
On-Device Learning On-device AI is becoming more
ubiquitously adopted to enable model personalization [ 84],
[85], [86] while improving data privacy [ 87], [88], [89], [90],
yet its impact in terms of carbon emission is often overlooked.
On-device learning emits non-negligible carbon. Figure 11
illustrates that the operational carbon footprint for training a
small ML task using federated learning (FL) is comparable to
00.511.522.533.5FL-1FL-2TPU-BaseTPU-GreenP100-BaseP100-GreenFacebookTransformer-big (non-FL)CO2e (kg)HundredsDownloadUploadCompute""Fig. 11. Federated learning and optimization can result in a non-negligible
amount of carbon emissions, equivalent to the carbon footprint of training
Transformer Big [21]. FL-1 and FL-2 represent two production FL
applications. P100-Base represents the carbon footprint of Transformer Big
training on P100 GPU whereas TPU-base is Transformer Big training on
TPU. P100-Green and TPU-Green consider renewable energy at the cloud
(Methodology detail in Appendix B).
that of training an orders-of-magnitude larger Transformer-
based model in a centralized setting. As FL trains local
models on client devices and periodically aggregates the model
parameters for a global model, without collecting raw user
data [ 87], the FL process can emit non-negligible carbon at the
edge due to both computation and wireless communication.
It is important to reduce AI’s environmental footprint at the
edge. With the ever-increasing demand for on-device use cases
over billions of client devices, such as teaching AI to understand
the physical environment from the ﬁrst-person perception [ 91]
or personalizing AI tasks, the carbon footprint for on-device
AI can add up to a dire amount quickly. Also, renewable
energy is far more limited for client devices compared to
datacenters. Optimizing the overall energy efﬁciency of FL
and on-device AI is an important ﬁrst step [ 92], [93], [94],
[95], [96]. Reducing embodied carbon cost for edge devices is
also important, as manufacturing carbon cost accounts for 74%
of the total footprint [ 19] of client devices. It is particularly
challenging to amortize the embodied carbon footprint because
client devices are often under-utilized [97].
V. C ALL-TO-ACTION
A. Development of Easy-to-Adopt Telemetry for Assessing AI’s
Environmental Footprint
While the open source community has started building tools
to enable automatic measurement of AI training’s environmental
footprint [ 39], [40], [98], [99] and the ML research community
requiring a broader impact statement for the submitted research
manuscript, more can be done in order to incorporate efﬁciency
and sustainability into the design process. Enabling carbon
accounting methodologies and telemetry that is easy to adopt
is an important step to quantify the signiﬁcance of our
progress in developing AI technologies in an environmentally-
responsible manner. While assessing the novelty and quality
of ML solutions, it is crucial to consider sustainability metrics
including energy consumption andcarbon footprint along with
measures of model quality andsystem performance .
9
Metrics for AI Model and System Life Cycles: Standard
carbon footprint accounting methods for AI’s overall carbon
footprint are at a nascent stage. We need simple, easy-to-
adopt metrics to make fair and useful comparisons between
AI innovations. Many different aspects must be accounted
for, including the life cycles of both AI models ( Data ,
Experimentation ,Training ,Deployment ) and system hardware
(Manufacturing andUse) (Section II).
In addition to incorporating an efﬁciency measure as part
of leader boards for various ML tasks, data [ 100], models7,
training algorithms [ 101], environmental impact must also be
considered and adopted by AI system hardware developers. For
example, MLPerf [ 102], [103], [104] is the industry standard
for ML system performance comparison. The industry has
witnessed signiﬁcantly higher system performance speedup,
outstripping what is enabled by Moore’s Law [ 105], [106].
Moreover, an algorithm efﬁciency benchmark is under develop-
ment8. The MLPerf benchmark standards can advance the ﬁeld
of AI in an environmentally-competitive manner by enabling
the measurement of energy and/or carbon footprint.
Carbon Impact Statements and Model Cards: We believe
it is important for all published research papers to disclose
the operational and embodied carbon footprint of proposed
design; we are only at the beginning of this journey9. Note,
while embodied carbon footprints for AI hardware may not be
readily available, describing hardware platforms, the number of
machines, total runtime used to produce results presented in a
research manuscript is an important ﬁrst step. In addition, new
models must be associated with a model card that, among other
aspects of data sets and models [ 107], describes the model’s
overall carbon footprint to train and conduct inference.
VI. K EYTAKEAWAYS
The Growth of AI: Deep learning has witnessed an
exponential growth in training data, model parameters, and
system resources over the recent years (Figure 2). The amount
of data for AI has grown by 2:4, leading to 3:2increase in
the data ingestion bandwidth demand at Facebook. Facebook’s
recommendation model sizes have increased by 20between
2019 and 2021. The explosive growth in AI use cases has
driven 2:9and2:5capacity increases for AI training and
inference at Facebook over the recent 18 months, respectively.
The environmental footprint of AI is staggering (Figure 4,
Figure 5).
A Holistic Approach: To ensure an environmentally-
sustainable growth of AI, we must consider the AI ecosystem
holistically going forward. We must look at the machine learn-
ing pipelines end-to-end — data collection, model exploration
and experimentation, model training, optimization and run-
time inference (Section II). The frequency of training and
scale of each stage of the ML pipeline must be considered
to understand salient bottlenecks to sustainable AI. From the
system’s perspective, the life cycle of model development and
7Papers with code: https://paperswithcode.com/sota/image-classiﬁcation-on
-imagenet
8https://github.com/mlcommons/algorithmic-efﬁciency/
9https://2021.naacl.org/ethics/faq/#-if-my-paper-reports-on-experiments-t
hat-involve-lots-of-compute-timepowersystem hardware, including manufacturing andoperational use ,
must also be accounted for.
Efﬁciency Optimization: Optimization across the axes of al-
gorithms, platforms, infrastructures, hardware can signiﬁcantly
reduce the operational carbon footprint for the Transformer-
based universal translation model by 810. Along with other
efﬁciency optimization at-scale, this has translated into 25.8%
operational energy footprint reduction over the two-year period.
More must be done to bend the environmental impact from the
exponential growth of AI (Figure 8 and Figure 9).
An Sustainability Mindset for AI: Optimization beyond
efﬁciency across the software and hardware stack at scale is
crucial to enabling future sustainable AI systems. To develop
AI technologies responsibly, we must achieve competitive
model accuracy at a ﬁxed or even reduced computational
and environmental cost. We chart out potentially high-impact
research and development directions across the data,algorithms
and model ,experimentation andsystem hardware , and telemetry
dimensions for AI at datacenters and at the edge (Section IV).
We must take a deliberate approach when developing
AI research and technologies, considering the environmental
impact of innovations and taking a responsible approach to
technology development [ 108]. That is, we need AI to be green
and environmentally-sustainable.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper is the ﬁrst effort to explore the environmental
impact of the super-linear trends for AI growth from a holistic
perspective, spanning data,algorithms , and system hardware .
We characterize the carbon footprint of AI computing by
examining the model development cycle across industry-scale
ML use cases at Facebook and, at the same time, considering
the life cycle of system hardware. Furthermore, we capture
the operational and manufacturing carbon footprint of AI
computing and present an end-to-end analysis for what and
how hardware-software design and at-scale optimization can
help reduce the overall carbon footprint of AI. We share
the key challenges and chart out important directions across
all dimensions of AI—data, algorithms, systems, metrics,
standards, and best experimentation practices. Advancing the
ﬁeld of machine intelligence must not in turn make climate
change worse. We must develop AI technologies with a deeper
understanding of the societal and environmental implications.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Nikhil Gupta, Lei Tian, Weiyi
Zheng, Manisha Jain, Adnan Aziz, and Adam Lerer for
their feedback on many iterations of this draft, and in-depth
technical discussions around building efﬁcient infrastructure
and platforms; Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mona Diab,
Ashkan Yousefpour for the valuable discussions and insights
on AI and environmental responsibility; Mark Zhou, Niket
Agarwal, Jongsoo Park, Michael Anderson, Xiaodong Wang;
Yatharth Saraf, Hagay Lupesco, Jigar Desai, Joelle Pineau,
Ram Valliyappan, Rajesh Mosur, Ananth Sankarnarayanan and
Eytan Bakshy for their leadership and vision without which
this work would not have been possible.
10
REFERENCES
[1]J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger,
K. Tunyasuvunakool, R. Bates, A. ˇZ´ıdek, A. Potapenko, A. Bridgland,
C. Meyer, S. A. A. Kohl, A. J. Ballard, A. Cowie, B. Romera-
Paredes, S. Nikolov, R. Jain, J. Adler, T. Back, S. Petersen, D. Reiman,
E. Clancy, M. Zielinski, M. Steinegger, M. Pacholska, T. Berghammer,
S. Bodenstein, D. Silver, O. Vinyals, A. W. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu,
P. Kohli, and D. Hassabis, “Highly accurate protein structure prediction
with alphafold,” Nature , 2021.
[2]M. Komeili, K. Shuster, and J. Weston, “Internet-augmented dialogue
generation,” arXiv:2107.07566 , 2021.
[3]D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, and D. Hassabis, “AlphaZero:
Shedding new light on chess, shogi, and Go,” 2018.
[4]C. L. Zitnick, L. Chanussot, A. Das, S. Goyal, J. Heras-Domingo,
C. Ho, W. Hu, T. Lavril, A. Palizhati, M. Riviere, M. Shuaibi, A. Sriram,
K. Tran, B. Wood, J. Yoon, D. Parikh, and Z. Ulissi, “An introduction
to electrocatalyst design using machine learning for renewable energy
storage,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09435 , 2020.
[5]C. Elkin and S. Witherspoon, “Machine learning can boost the value
of wind energy,” 2019.
[6]R. Evans and J. Gao, “DeepMind AI Reduces Google Data Centre
Cooling Bill by 40%,” 2016.
[7]K. Sheikh, “A Growing Presence on the Farm: Robots,” February 2020.
[8]D. Rolnick, P. L. Donti, L. H. Kaack, K. Kochanski, A. Lacoste,
K. Sankaran, A. S. Ross, N. Milojevic-Dupont, N. Jaques, A. Waldman-
Brown, A. Luccioni, T. Maharaj, E. D. Sherwin, S. K. Mukkavilli, K. P.
Kording, C. Gomes, A. Y . Ng, D. Hassabis, J. C. Platt, F. Creutzig,
J. Chayes, and Y . Bengio, “Tackling climate change with machine
learning,” arXiv:1906.05433 , 2019.
[9]R. Nishant, M. Kennedy, and J. Corbett, “Artiﬁcial intelligence
for sustainability: Challenges, opportunities, and a research agenda,”
International Journal of Information Management , vol. 53, 2020.
[10] Facts and Factors, “Global artiﬁcial intelligence market,” 2021.
[11] D. Mudigere, Y . Hao, J. Huang, A. Tulloch, S. Sridharan, X. Liu,
M. Ozdal, J. Nie, J. Park, L. Luo, J. A. Yang, L. Gao, D. Ivchenko,
A. Basant, Y . Hu, J. Yang, E. K. Ardestani, X. Wang, R. Komuravelli,
C. Chu, S. Yilmaz, H. Li, J. Qian, Z. Feng, Y . Ma, J. Yang, E. Wen,
H. Li, L. Yang, C. Sun, W. Zhao, D. Melts, K. Dhulipala, K. R.
Kishore, T. Graf, A. Eisenman, K. K. Matam, A. Gangidi, G. J.
Chen, M. Krishnan, A. Nayak, K. Nair, B. Muthiah, M. khorashadi,
P. Bhattacharya, P. Lapukhov, M. Naumov, L. Qiao, M. Smelyanskiy,
B. Jia, and V . Rao, “Software-hardware co-design for fast and scalable
training of deep learning recommendation models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.05158 , 2021.
[12] D. Hernandez and T. B. Brown, “Measuring the algorithmic efﬁciency
of neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04305 , 2020.
[13] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-
V oss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler,
J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray,
B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever,
and D. Amodei, “Language models are few-shot learners,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14165 , 2020.
[14] P. Nayak, “Understanding searches better than ever before,” 2019.
[15] X. Yi, Y .-F. Chen, S. Ramesh, V . Rajashekhar, L. Hong, N. Fiedel,
N. Seshadri, L. Heldt, X. Wu, and E. H. Chi, “Factorized deep retrieval
and distributed tensorﬂow serving,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning
and Systems , 2018.
[16] W. Zhao, D. Xie, R. Jia, Y . Qian, R. Ding, M. Sun, and P. Li, “Distributed
hierarchical gpu parameter server for massive scale deep learning ads
systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05622 , 2020.
[17] M. Lui, Y . Yetim, O. Ozkan, Z. Zhao, S.-Y . Tsai, C.-J. Wu, and M. Hemp-
stead, “Understanding capacity-driven scale-out neural recommendation
inference,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on
Performance Analysis of Systems and Software , 2021.
[18] S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, J. Rasley, S. Smith, and Y . He, “Zero-inﬁnity:
Breaking the gpu memory wall for extreme scale deep learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.07857 , 2021.
[19] U. Gupta, Y . Kim, S. Lee, J. Tse, H. S. Lee, G. Wei, D. Brooks,
and C. Wu, “Chasing carbon: The elusive environmental footprint of
computing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on
High-Performance Computer Architecture , 2021.[20] N. Tomasev, J. Cornebise, F. Hutter, S. Mohamed, A. Picciariello,
B. Connelly, D. Belgrave, D. Ezer, F. C. van der Haert, F. Mugisha,
G. Abila, H. Arai, H. Almiraat, J. Proskurnia, K. Snyder, M. Otake-
Matsuura, M. Othman, T. Glasmachers, W. D. Wever, Y . Teh, M. E.
Khan, R. D. Winne, T. Schaul, and C. Clopath, “Ai for social good:
unlocking the opportunity for positive impact,” Nature Communications ,
vol. 11, 2020.
[21] D. Patterson, J. Gonzalez, Q. Le, C. Liang, L.-M. Munguia, D. Rothchild,
D. So, M. Texier, and J. Dean, “Carbon emissions and large neural
network training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10350 , 2021.
[22] EPA, “United states environmental protection agency greenhouse gas
equivalencies calculator,” 2021.
[23] Facebook, “2020 sustainability report,” 2021.
[24] K. Hazelwood, S. Bird, D. Brooks, S. Chintala, U. Diril, D. Dzhulgakov,
M. Fawzy, B. Jia, Y . Jia, A. Kalro, J. Law, K. Lee, J. Lu, P. Noordhuis,
M. Smelyanskiy, L. Xiong, and X. Wang, “Applied machine learning
at facebook: A datacenter infrastructure perspective,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture , 2018.
[25] A. Conneau, K. Khandelwal, N. Goyal, V . Chaudhary, G. Wenzek,
F. Guzm ´an, E. Grave, M. Ott, L. Zettlemoyer, and V . Stoyanov,
“Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1911.02116 , 2020.
[26] M. Naumov, D. Mudigere, H.-J. M. Shi, J. Huang, N. Sundaraman,
J. Park, X. Wang, U. Gupta, C.-J. Wu, A. G. Azzolini, D. Dzhulgakov,
A. Mallevich, I. Cherniavskii, Y . Lu, R. Krishnamoorthi, A. Yu,
V . Kondratenko, S. Pereira, X. Chen, W. Chen, V . Rao, B. Jia,
L. Xiong, and M. Smelyanskiy, “Deep learning recommendation
model for personalization and recommendation systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.00091 , 2019.
[27] U. Gupta, C.-J. Wu, X. Wang, M. Naumov, B. Reagen, D. Brooks,
B. Cottel, K. Hazelwood, M. Hempstead, B. Jia, H.-H. S. Lee,
A. Malevich, D. Mudigere, M. Smelyanskiy, L. Xiong, and X. Zhang,
“The architectural implications of facebook’s dnn-based personalized
recommendation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium
on High Performance Computer Architecture , 2020.
[28] E. Strubell, A. Ganesh, and A. McCallum, “Energy and policy consid-
erations for deep learning in nlp,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02243 ,
2019.
[29] W. Fedus, B. Zoph, and N. Shazeer, “Switch transformers: Scaling to
trillion parameter models with simple and efﬁcient sparsity,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/2101.03961, 2021.
[30] D. Adiwardana and T. Luong, “Towards a conversational agent that can
chat about... anything,” 2020.
[31] Apple, “Product environmental report Mac Pro,” 2019.
[32] NVIDIA, “Faster Transformer,” 2021.
[33] L. Ke, U. Gupta, B. Y . Cho, D. Brooks, V . Chandra, U. Diril,
A. Firoozshahian, K. Hazelwood, B. Jia, H.-H. S. Lee, M. Li, B. Maher,
D. Mudigere, M. Naumov, M. Schatz, M. Smelyanskiy, X. Wang,
B. Reagen, C.-J. Wu, M. Hempstead, and X. Zhang, “Recnmp: Accel-
erating personalized recommendation with near-memory processing,”
inProceedings of the ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture , 2020.
[34] Z. Deng, J. Park, P. T. P. Tang, H. Liu, J. Yang, H. Yuen, J. Huang,
D. Khudia, X. Wei, E. Wen, D. Choudhary, R. Krishnamoorthi, C.-J. Wu,
S. Nadathur, C. Kim, M. Naumov, S. Naghshineh, and M. Smelyanskiy,
“Low-precision hardware architectures meet recommendation model
inference at scale,” IEEE Micro , vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 93–100, 2021.
[35] L. Wesolowski, B. Acun, V . Andrei, A. Aziz, G. Dankel, C. Gregg,
X. Meng, C. Meurillon, D. Sheahan, L. Tian, J. Yang, P. Yu, and
K. Hazelwood, “Datacenter-scale analysis and optimization of gpu
machine learning workloads,” IEEE Micro , vol. 41, no. 5, 2021.
[36] A. Sriraman, A. Dhanotia, and T. F. Wenisch, “Softsku: Optimizing
server architectures for microservice diversity @scale,” in Proceed-
ings of the 46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture ,
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019.
[37] A. Sriraman and A. Dhanotia, “Accelerometer: Understanding ac-
celeration opportunities for data center overheads at hyperscale,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems , 2020.
[38] C. Tang, K. Yu, K. Veeraraghavan, J. Kaldor, S. Michelson, T. Kooburat,
A. Anbudurai, M. Clark, K. Gogia, L. Cheng, B. Christensen, A. Gartrell,
11
M. Khutornenko, S. Kulkarni, M. Pawlowski, T. Pelkonen, A. Rodrigues,
R. Tibrewal, V . Venkatesan, and P. Zhang, “Twine: A uniﬁed cluster
management system for shared infrastructure,” in Proceedings of the
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ,
2020.
[39] A. Lacoste, A. Luccioni, V . Schmidt, and T. Dandres, “Quantifying the
carbon emissions of machine learning,” Workshop on Tackling Climate
Change with Machine Learning at NeurIPS 2019 , 2019.
[40] P. Henderson, J. Hu, J. Romoff, E. Brunskill, D. Jurafsky, and J. Pineau,
“Towards the systematic reporting of the energy and carbon footprints
of machine learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/2002.05651, 2020.
[41] E. M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, and S. Shmitchell, “On
the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big?,” in
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency , 2021.
[42] N. Sachdeva, C.-J. Wu, and J. McAuley, “Svp-cf: Selection via proxy
for collaborative ﬁltering data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04984 , 2021.
[43] E. Valavi, J. Hestness, N. Ardalani, and M. Iansiti, Time and the Value
of Data . Working papers, Harvard Business School, 2020.
[44] M. Zhao, N. Agarwal, A. Basant, B. Gedik, S. Pan, M. Ozdal,
R. Komuravelli, J. Pan, T. Bao, H. Lu, S. Narayanan, J. Langman,
K. Wilfong, H. Rastogi, C. Wu, C. Kozyrakis, and P. Pol, “Understanding
and co-designing the data ingestion pipeline for industry-scale recsys
training,” CoRR , vol. abs/2108.09373, 2021.
[45] R. Turner, D. Eriksson, M. McCourt, J. Kiili, E. Laaksonen, Z. Xu,
and I. Guyon, “Bayesian optimization is superior to random search for
machine learning hyperparameter tuning: Analysis of the black-box
optimization challenge 2020,” CoRR , vol. abs/2104.10201, 2021.
[46] P. Ren, Y . Xiao, X. Chang, P.-y. Huang, Z. Li, X. Chen, and X. Wang,
“A comprehensive survey of neural architecture search: Challenges and
solutions,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 54, no. 4, 2021.
[47] Q. Song, D. Cheng, H. Zhou, J. Yang, Y . Tian, and X. Hu, “Towards
automated neural interaction discovery for click-through rate prediction,”
Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2020.
[48] M. R. Joglekar, C. Li, M. Chen, T. Xu, X. Wang, J. K. Adams, P. Khaitan,
J. Liu, and Q. V . Le, “Neural input search for large scale recommendation
models,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2020.
[49] M. Tan and Q. V . Le, “Efﬁcientnet: Rethinking model scaling for
convolutional neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11946 , 2020.
[50] D. Eriksson, P. I. Chuang, S. Daulton, P. Xia, A. Shrivastava, A. Babu,
S. Zhao, A. Aly, G. Venkatesh, and M. Balandat, “Latency-aware neural
architecture search with multi-objective bayesian optimization,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/2106.11890, 2021.
[51] H. Cai, C. Gan, T. Wang, Z. Zhang, and S. Han, “Once-for-all: Train
one network and specialize it for efﬁcient deployment,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.09791 , 2020.
[52] D. Stamoulis, R. Ding, D. Wang, D. Lymberopoulos, B. Priyantha, J. Liu,
and D. Marculescu, “Single-path nas: Designing hardware-efﬁcient
convnets in less than 4 hours,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02877 , 2019.
[53] W. Chen, X. Gong, and Z. Wang, “Neural architecture search on
imagenet in four gpu hours: A theoretically inspired perspective,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.11535 , 2021.
[54] J. Mellor, J. Turner, A. Storkey, and E. J. Crowley, “Neural architecture
search without training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04647 , 2021.
[55] B. Acun, M. Murphy, X. Wang, J. Nie, C. Wu, and K. Hazelwood,
“Understanding training efﬁciency of deep learning recommendation
models at scale,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium
on High-Performance Computer Architecture , 2021.
[56] C. Yin, B. Acun, X. Liu, and C.-J. Wu, “TT-Rec: Tensor train
compression for deep learning recommendation models,” in Proceedings
of the Conference on Machine Learning and Systems , 2021.
[57] W.-C. Kang, D. Z. Cheng, T. Yao, X. Yi, T. Chen, L. Hong, and E. H.
Chi, “Learning to embed categorical features without embedding tables
for recommendation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.10784 , 2021.
[58] A. S. Nemirovskij and D. B. Yudin, Problem complexity and method
efﬁciency in optimization . Wiley-Interscience, 1983.
[59] D. Choi, C. J. Shallue, Z. Nado, J. Lee, C. J. Maddison, and G. E.
Dahl, “On empirical comparisons of optimizers for deep learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.05446 , 2019.[60] P. T. Sivaprasad, F. Mai, T. V ogels, M. Jaggi, and F. Fleuret, “Opti-
mizer benchmarking needs to account for hyperparameter tuning,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning ,
2020.
[61] P. Goyal, P. Doll ´ar, R. Girshick, P. Noordhuis, L. Wesolowski, A. Kyrola,
A. Tulloch, Y . Jia, and K. He, “Accurate, large minibatch sgd: Training
imagenet in 1 hour,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02677 , 2017.
[62] M. Ott, S. Edunov, D. Grangier, and M. Auli, “Scaling neural machine
translation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00187 , 2018.
[63] D. Alistarh, D. Grubic, J. Li, R. Tomioka, and M. V ojnovic, “Qsgd:
Communication-efﬁcient sgd via gradient quantization and encoding,” in
Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
vol. 30, 2017.
[64] T. V ogels, S. P. Karinireddy, and M. Jaggi, “Powersgd: Practical low-
rank gradient compression for distributed optimization,” in Proceedings
of the Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32,
2019.
[65] Y . Huang, Y . Cheng, A. Bapna, O. Firat, D. Chen, M. Chen, H. Lee,
J. Ngiam, Q. V . Le, Y . Wu, et al. , “Gpipe: Efﬁcient training of giant
neural networks using pipeline parallelism,” in Proceedings of the
Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 32, 2019.
[66] S. Rajbhandari, J. Rasley, O. Ruwase, and Y . He, “Zero: Memory
optimizations toward training trillion parameter models,” in Proceedings
of the International Conference for High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage and Analysis , 2020.
[67] J. Rasley, S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, and Y . He, “Deepspeed: System
optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100
billion parameters,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2020.
[68] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal, R. Bajwa,
S. Bates, S. Bhatia, N. Boden, A. Borchers, R. Boyle, P.-l. Cantin,
C. Chao, C. Clark, J. Coriell, M. Daley, M. Dau, J. Dean, B. Gelb,
T. V . Ghaemmaghami, R. Gottipati, W. Gulland, R. Hagmann, C. R.
Ho, D. Hogberg, J. Hu, R. Hundt, D. Hurt, J. Ibarz, A. Jaffey,
A. Jaworski, A. Kaplan, H. Khaitan, D. Killebrew, A. Koch, N. Kumar,
S. Lacy, J. Laudon, J. Law, D. Le, C. Leary, Z. Liu, K. Lucke,
A. Lundin, G. MacKean, A. Maggiore, M. Mahony, K. Miller, R. Na-
garajan, R. Narayanaswami, R. Ni, K. Nix, T. Norrie, M. Omernick,
N. Penukonda, A. Phelps, J. Ross, M. Ross, A. Salek, E. Samadiani,
C. Severn, G. Sizikov, M. Snelham, J. Souter, D. Steinberg, A. Swing,
M. Tan, G. Thorson, B. Tian, H. Toma, E. Tuttle, V . Vasudevan,
R. Walter, W. Wang, E. Wilcox, and D. H. Yoon, “In-datacenter
performance analysis of a tensor processing unit,” in Proceedings of the
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Computer Architecture , 2017.
[69] J. Hamilton, “AWS Inferentia Machine Learning Processor,” 2018.
[70] Azure, “New Azure HPC and partner offerings at Supercomputing 19,”
2019.
[71] NVIDIA, “GPUs for Virtualization,” 2021.
[72] A. Spiridonov, “New Cloud TPU VMs make training your ML models
on TPUs easier than ever,” 2021.
[73] M. Gschwind, T. Kaldewey, and D. Tam, “Optimizing the efﬁciency
of deep learning through accelerator virtualization,” IBM Journal of
Research and Development , vol. 61, no. 4-5, 2017.
[74] S. Ghodrati, B. H. Ahn, J. Kyung Kim, S. Kinzer, B. R. Yatham,
N. Alla, H. Sharma, M. Alian, E. Ebrahimi, N. S. Kim, C. Young, and
H. Esmaeilzadeh, “Planaria: Dynamic architecture ﬁssion for spatial
multi-tenant acceleration of deep neural networks,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture , 2020.
[75] S.-C. Kao and T. Krishna, “Domain-speciﬁc genetic algorithm for multi-
tenant dnnaccelerator scheduling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13997 ,
2021.
[76] M. Jeon, S. Venkataraman, A. Phanishayee, u. Qian, W. Xiao, and
F. Yang, “Analysis of large-scale multi-tenant gpu clusters for dnn
training workloads,” in Proceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical
Conference , 2019.
[77] P. Yu and M. Chowdhury, “Salus: Fine-grained gpu sharing primitives
for deep learning applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04610 , 2019.
[78] R. Jain and J. Wullert, “Challenges: Environmental design for pervasive
computing systems,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking , 2002.
[79] J. Chang, J. Meza, P. Ranganathan, C. Bash, and A. Shah, “Green server
design: Beyond operational energy to sustainability,” in Proceedings of
12
the International Conference on Power Aware Computing and Systems ,
2010.
[80] M. Garcia Bardon, P. Wuytens, L.-A. Ragnarsson, G. Mirabelli, D. Jang,
G. Willems, A. Mallik, A. Spessot, J. Ryckaert, and B. Parvais, “DTCO
including sustainability: Power-performance-area-cost-environmental
score (PPACE) analysis for logic technologies,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting , 2020.
[81] A. Putnam, A. M. Caulﬁeld, E. S. Chung, D. Chiou, K. Constantinides,
J. Demme, H. Esmaeilzadeh, J. Fowers, G. P. Gopal, J. Gray, M. Hasel-
man, S. Hauck, S. Heil, A. Hormati, J.-Y . Kim, S. Lanka, J. Larus,
E. Peterson, S. Pope, A. Smith, J. Thong, P. Y . Xiao, and D. Burger,
“A reconﬁgurable fabric for accelerating large-scale datacenter services,”
IEEE Micro , 2015.
[82] Y .-H. Chen, J. Emer, and V . Sze, “Eyeriss: A spatial architecture
for energy-efﬁcient dataﬂow for convolutional neural networks,” in
Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Computer
Architecture , 2016.
[83] A. Radovanovic, R. Koningstein, I. Schneider, B. Chen, A. Duarte,
B. Roy, D. Xiao, M. Haridasan, P. Hung, N. Care, et al. , “Carbon-aware
computing for datacenters,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11750 , 2021.
[84] H. Cai, C. Gan, L. Zhu, and S. Han, “Tinytl: Reduce memory, not param-
eters for efﬁcient on-device learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.11622 ,
2020.
[85] K. Wang, R. Mathews, C. Kiddon, H. Eichner, F. Beaufays, and
D. Ramage, “Federated evaluation of on-device personalization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.10252 , 2019.
[86] K. Bonawitz, H. Eichner, W. Grieskamp, D. Huba, A. Ingerman,
V . Ivanov, C. Kiddon, J. Kone ˇcn`y, S. Mazzocchi, H. B. McMahan,
et al. , “Towards federated learning at scale: System design,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.01046 , 2019.
[87] A. Hard, K. Rao, R. Mathews, S. Ramaswamy, F. Beaufays, S. Augen-
stein, H. Eichner, C. Kiddon, and D. Ramage, “Federated learning for
mobile keyboard prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03604 , 2018.
[88] T. Yang, G. Andrew, H. Eichner, H. Sun, W. Li, N. Kong, D. Ramage,
and F. Beaufays, “Applied federated learning: Improving google
keyboard query suggestions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02903 , 2018.
[89] S. Ramaswamy, R. Mathews, K. Rao, and F. Beaufays, “Federated
learning for emoji prediction in a mobile keyboard,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.04329 , 2019.
[90] D. Huba, J. Nguyen, K. Malik, R. Zhu, M. Rabbat, A. Yousefpour,
C.-J. Wu, H. Zhan, P. Ustinov, H. Srinivas, K. Wang, A. Shoumikhin,
J. Min, and M. Malek, “Papaya: Practical, private, and scalable federated
learning,” arXiv:2111.04877 , 2021.
[91] K. Grauman, A. Westbury, E. Byrne, Z. Chavis, A. Furnari, R. Girdhar,
J. Hamburger, H. Jiang, M. Liu, X. Liu, M. Martin, T. Nagarajan,
I. Radosavovic, S. K. Ramakrishnan, F. Ryan, J. Sharma, M. Wray,
M. Xu, E. Z. Xu, C. Zhao, S. Bansal, D. Batra, V . Cartillier, S. Crane,
T. Do, M. Doulaty, A. Erapalli, C. Feichtenhofer, A. Fragomeni, Q. Fu,
C. Fuegen, A. Gebreselasie, C. Gonzalez, J. Hillis, X. Huang, Y . Huang,
W. Jia, W. Khoo, J. Kolar, S. Kottur, A. Kumar, F. Landini, C. Li, Y . Li,
Z. Li, K. Mangalam, R. Modhugu, J. Munro, T. Murrell, T. Nishiyasu,
W. Price, P. R. Puentes, M. Ramazanova, L. Sari, K. Somasundaram,
A. Southerland, Y . Sugano, R. Tao, M. V o, Y . Wang, X. Wu, T. Yagi,
Y . Zhu, P. Arbelaez, D. Crandall, D. Damen, G. M. Farinella, B. Ghanem,
V . K. Ithapu, C. V . Jawahar, H. Joo, K. Kitani, H. Li, R. Newcombe,
A. Oliva, H. S. Park, J. M. Rehg, Y . Sato, J. Shi, M. Z. Shou, A. Torralba,
L. Torresani, M. Yan, and J. Malik, “Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000
hours of egocentric video,” arXiv:2110.07058 , 2021.
[92] Y . G. Kim and C.-J. Wu, “Autoﬂ: Enabling heterogeneity-aware
energy efﬁcient federated learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture , 2021.
[93] Y . Kang, J. Hauswald, C. Gao, A. Rovinski, T. Mudge, J. Mars, and
L. Tang, “Neurosurgeon: Collaborative intelligence between the cloud
and mobile edge,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems , 2017.
[94] Y . G. Kim and C.-J. Wu, “Autoscale: Energy efﬁciency optimization for
stochastic edge inference using reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture , 2020.
[95] T.-J. Yang, Y .-H. Chen, and V . Sze, “Designing energy-efﬁcient convolu-
tional neural networks using energy-aware pruning,” arXiv:1611.05128 ,
2017.[96] D. Stamoulis, T.-W. R. Chin, A. K. Prakash, H. Fang, S. Sajja,
M. Bognar, and D. Marculescu, “Designing adaptive neural networks
for energy-constrained image classiﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computer-Aided Design , 2018.
[97] C. Gao, A. Gutierrez, M. Rajan, R. G. Dreslinski, T. Mudge, and C.-
J. Wu, “A study of mobile device utilization,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems
and Software , 2015.
[98] V . Schmidt, K. Goyal, A. Joshi, B. Feld, L. Conell, N. Laskaris, D. Blank,
J. Wilson, S. Friedler, and S. Luccioni, “CodeCarbon: Estimate and
Track Carbon Emissions from Machine Learning Computing,” 2021.
[99] K. Lottick, S. Susai, S. A. Friedler, and J. P. Wilson, “Energy usage
reports: Environmental awareness as part of algorithmic accountability,”
Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning at
NeurIPS 2019 , 2019.
[100] D. Kiela, M. Bartolo, Y . Nie, D. Kaushik, A. Geiger, Z. Wu,
B. Vidgen, G. Prasad, A. Singh, P. Ringshia, Z. Ma, T. Thrush,
S. Riedel, Z. Waseem, P. Stenetorp, R. Jia, M. Bansal, C. Potts, and
A. Williams, “Dynabench: Rethinking benchmarking in NLP,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.14337 , 2021.
[101] D. Hernandez and T. B. Brown, “Measuring the algorithmic efﬁciency
of neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04305 , 2020.
[102] P. Mattson, V . J. Reddi, C. Cheng, C. Coleman, G. Diamos, D. Kanter,
P. Micikevicius, D. Patterson, G. Schmuelling, H. Tang, G.-Y . Wei, and
C.-J. Wu, “Mlperf: An industry standard benchmark suite for machine
learning performance,” IEEE Micro , vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 8–16, 2020.
[103] V . J. Reddi, C. Cheng, D. Kanter, P. Mattson, G. Schmuelling, and C.-J.
Wu, “The vision behind mlperf: Understanding ai inference performance,”
IEEE Micro , vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 10–18, 2021.
[104] V . J. Reddi, D. Kanter, P. Mattson, J. Duke, T. Nguyen, R. Chukka,
K. Shiring, K.-S. Tan, M. Charlebois, W. Chou, M. El-Khamy, J. Hong,
M. Buch, C. Trinh, T. Atta-fosu, F. Cakir, M. Charkhabi, X. Chen,
J. Chiang, D. Dexter, W. Heo, G. Schmuelling, M. Shabani, and D. Zika,
“Mlperf mobile inference benchmark,” arXiv:2012.02328 , 2021.
[105] P. Mattson, C. Cheng, G. Diamos, C. Coleman, P. Micikevicius,
D. Patterson, H. Tang, G.-Y . Wei, P. Bailis, V . Bittorf, D. Brooks,
D. Chen, D. Dutta, U. Gupta, K. Hazelwood, A. Hock, X. Huang,
D. Kang, D. Kanter, N. Kumar, J. Liao, D. Narayanan, T. Oguntebi,
G. Pekhimenko, L. Pentecost, V . Janapa Reddi, T. Robie, T. St John, C.-
J. Wu, L. Xu, C. Young, and M. Zaharia, “Mlperf training benchmark,”
inProceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , vol. 2, 2020.
[106] V . J. Reddi, C. Cheng, D. Kanter, P. Mattson, G. Schmuelling, C.-J.
Wu, B. Anderson, M. Breughe, M. Charlebois, W. Chou, R. Chukka,
C. Coleman, S. Davis, P. Deng, G. Diamos, J. Duke, D. Fick, J. S.
Gardner, I. Hubara, S. Idgunji, T. B. Jablin, J. Jiao, T. S. John, P. Kanwar,
D. Lee, J. Liao, A. Lokhmotov, F. Massa, P. Meng, P. Micikevicius,
C. Osborne, G. Pekhimenko, A. T. R. Rajan, D. Sequeira, A. Sirasao,
F. Sun, H. Tang, M. Thomson, F. Wei, E. Wu, L. Xu, K. Yamada,
B. Yu, G. Yuan, A. Zhong, P. Zhang, and Y . Zhou, “Mlperf inference
benchmark,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture , 2020.
[107] M. Mitchell, S. Wu, A. Zaldivar, P. Barnes, L. Vasserman, B. Hutchin-
son, E. Spitzer, I. D. Raji, and T. Gebru, “Model cards for model
reporting,” Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency , 2019.
[108] C.-J. Wu, S. Manne, P. Ranganathan, S. Bird, and S. Greenstein,
“Socio-technological challenges and opportunities: Paths forward,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.06738 , 2021.
[109] R. Schwartz, J. Dodge, N. A. Smith, and O. Etzioni, “Green ai,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.10597 , 2019.
[110] K. Maeng, S. Bharuka, I. Gao, M. C. Jeffrey, V . Saraph, B.-Y . Su,
C. Trippel, J. Yang, M. Rabbat, B. Lucia, and C.-J. Wu, “Cpr:
Understanding and improving failure tolerant training for deep learning
recommendation with partial recovery,” in Proceedings of the Conference
on Machine Learning and Systems , 2021.
[111] A. Eisenman, K. K. Matam, S. Ingram, D. Mudigere, R. Krishnamoorthi,
K. Nair, M. Smelyanskiy, and M. Annavaram, “Check-n-run: A
checkpointing system for training deep learning recommendation
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08679 , 2021.
[112] H. D. Dixit, S. Pendharkar, M. Beadon, C. Mason, T. Chakravarthy,
B. Muthiah, and S. Sankar, “Silent data corruptions at scale,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.11245 , 2021.
13
[113] P. H. Hochschild, P. Turner, J. C. Mogul, R. Govindaraju, P. Ranganathan,
D. E. Culler, and A. Vahdat, “Cores that don’t count,” in Proceedings
of the Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems , 2021.
[114] X. Qiu, T. Parcollet, J. Fernandez-Marques, P. P. B. de Gusmao, D. J.
Beutel, T. Topal, A. Mathur, and N. D. Lane, “A ﬁrst look into the
carbon footprint of federated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07627 ,
2021.
[115] H. Wang, B. Kim, J. Xie, and Z. Han, “How is energy consumed in
smartphone deep learning apps? executing locally vs. remotely,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Global Communications Conference , 2019.
[116] C.-J. Wu, D. Brooks, K. Chen, D. Chen, S. Choudhury, M. Dukhan,
K. Hazelwood, E. Isaac, Y . Jia, B. Jia, T. Leyvand, H. Lu, Y . Lu, L. Qiao,
B. Reagen, J. Spisak, F. Sun, A. Tulloch, P. Vajda, X. Wang, Y . Wang,
B. Wasti, Y . Wu, R. Xian, S. Yoo, and P. Zhang, “Machine learning
at facebook: Understanding inference at the edge,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture , 2019.
[117] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von
Arx, M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg, A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill, et al. , “On
the opportunities and risks of foundation models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07258 , 2021.
[118] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proceedings of the
International conference on machine learning , pp. 1597–1607, 2020.
[119] M. Assran, M. Caron, I. Misra, P. Bojanowski, A. Joulin, N. Ballas,
and M. Rabbat, “Semi-supervised learning of visual features by non-
parametrically predicting view assignments with support samples,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.13963 , 2021.
[120] L. M. Dery, P. Michel, A. Talwalkar, and G. Neubig, “Should we be
pre-training? an argument for end-task aware training as an alternative,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07437 , 2021.
y = 0.7892x-0.004R²= 0.9969y = 0.7903x-0.002R²= 0.99860.7870.7890.7910.7930.7950.797
0.1250.250.5124Model Error  (Lower is Better)Energy/Step (J)Data Scale: 1XData Scale: 2XData Scale: 4XData Scale: 8XData Scale: 16XModel Scale: 2XModel Scale: 4XModel Scale: 8XModel Scale: 16XModel Scale: 32XModel Scale: 64XModel Scale: 128X0   0.0020.0040.0060.0080.010Fig. 12. Model quality of recommendation use cases improves as we scale up
the amount of data and/or the number of model parameters (e.g., embedding
cardinality or dimension), leading to higher energy and carbon footprint.
Maximizing model accuracy for the speciﬁc recommendation use case comes
with signiﬁcant energy cost — Roughly 4 energy saving can be achieved
with only 0.004 model quality degradation (green vs. yellow stars).
APPENDIX
Despite the recent calls-to-action [ 28], [39], [40], [41], the
overall community remains under-invested in research that aims
at deeply understanding and minimizing the cost of AI. There
are several factors that may have contributed to the current
state of AI:
Lack of incentives: Over 90% of the ML publications
only focus on model accuracy improvements at the
expense of efﬁciency [ 109]. Challenges10incentivize
investment into efﬁcient approaches.
Lack of common tools: There is no standard telemetry
in place to provide accurate, reliable energy and carbon
footprint measurement. The measurement methodology
is complex — factors, such as datacenter infrastructures,
hardware architectures, energy sources, can perturb the
ﬁnal measure easily.
Lack of normalization factors: Algorithmic progress in
ML is often presented in some measure of model accuracy,
e.g., BLEU, points, ELO, cross-entropy loss, but without
considering resource requirement as a normalization factor,
e.g., the number of
CPU/GPU/TPU hours used, the overall energy consump-
tion and/or carbon footprint required.
Platform fragmentation: Implementation details can
have a signiﬁcant impact on real-world efﬁciency, but
best practices remain elusive and platform fragmentation
prevents performance and efﬁciency portability across
model development.
A. Data Utilization Efﬁciency
Figure 12 depicts energy footprint reduction potential when
data and model scaling is performed in tandem. The x-axis
10Efﬁcient Open-Domain Question Answering (https://efﬁcientqa.github.io/),
SustaiNLP: Simple and Efﬁcient Natural Language Processing (https://site
s.google.com/view/sustainlp2020/home), and WMT: Machine Translation
Efﬁciency Task (http://www.statmt.org/wmt21/efﬁciency-task.html).
14
represents the energy footprint required per training step
whereas the y-axis represents model error. The blue solid
lines capture model size scaling (through embedding hash
scaling) while the training data set size is kept ﬁxed. Each
line corresponds to a different data set size, in an increasing
order from top to bottom. The points within each line represent
different model (embedding) sizes, in an increasing order from
left to right. The reddashed lines capture data scaling while the
model size is kept ﬁxed. Each line corresponds to a different
embedding hash size, in an increasing order from left to right.
The points within each line represent different data sizes, in
an increasing order from top to bottom. The dashed black
line captures the performance scaling trend as we scale data
and model sizes in tandem. This represents the energy-optimal
scaling approach.
Scaling data sizes or model sizes independently deviates from
the energy-optimal trend. We highlight two energy-optimal
settings along the Pareto-frontier curve. The yellow star uses
the scaling setting of Data scaling 2 andModel scaling 2 
whereas the green star adopts the setting of Data scaling 8 
andModel scaling 16 . The yellow star consumes roughly 4 
lower energy as compared to the green star with only 0.004
model quality degradation in Normalized Entropy. Overall
model quality performance has a (diminishing) power-law
relationship with the corresponding energy consumption and
the power of the power law is extremely small (0.002-0.004).
This means achieving higher model quality through model-data
scaling for recommendation use cases incurs signiﬁcant energy
cost.
B. Efﬁcient, Environmentally-Sustainable AI Systems
Disaggregating Machine Learning Pipeline Stages: As
depicted in Figure 3, the overall training throughput efﬁciency
for large-scale ML models depends on the throughput perfor-
mance of both data ingestion and pre-processing andmodel
training . Disaggregating the data ingestion and pre-processing
stage of the machine learning pipeline from model training
is the de-facto approach for industry-scale machine learning
model training. This allows training accelerator, network
and storage I/O bandwidth utilization to scale independently,
thereby increasing the overall model training throughput by
56% [ 44]. Disaggregation with well-designed check-pointing
support [ 110], [111] improves training fault tolerance as well.
By doing so, failure on nodes that are responsible for data
ingestion and pre-processing can be recovered efﬁciently
without requiring re-runs of the entire training experiment.
From a sustainability perspective, disaggregating the data
storage and ingestion stage from model training maximizes
infrastructure efﬁciency by using less system resources to
achieve higher training throughput , resulting in lower embodied
carbon footprint. By increasing fault tolerance, the operational
carbon footprint is reduced at the same time.
Fault-Tolerant AI Systems and Hardware: One way to
amortize the rising embodied carbon cost of AI infrastructures
is to extend hardware lifetime. However, hardware ages
— depending on the wear-out characteristics, increasingly
more errors can surface over time and result in silent datacorruption , leading to erroneous computation, model accuracy
degradation, non-deterministic ML execution, or fatal system
failure. In a large ﬂeet of processors, silent data corruption
can occur frequently enough to have disruptive impact on
service productivity [ 112], [113]. Decommissioning an AI
system entirely because of hardware faults is expensive from the
perspective of resource and environmental footprints. System
architects can design differential reliability levels for micro
architectural components on an AI system depending on the
ML model execution characteristics. Alternatively, algorithmic
fault tolerance can be built into deep learning programming
frameworks to provide a code execution path that is cognizant
of hardware wear-out characteristics.
On-Device Learning: Federated learning and optimization
can result in a non-negligible amount of carbon emissions
at the edge, similar to the carbon footprint of training
Transformer Big[21]. Figure 11 shows that the federated
learning and optimization process emits non-negligible carbon
at the edge due to both computation and wireless communi-
cation during the process. To estimate the carbon emission,
we used a similar methodology to [ 114]. We collected the
90-day log data for federated learning production use cases
at Facebook, which recorded the time spent on computation,
data downloading, and data uploading per client device. We
multiplied the computation time with the estimated device
power and upload/download time with the estimated router
power, and omitted other energy. We assumed a device power of
3W and a router power of 7.5W [ 115], [114]. Model training on
client edge devices is inherently less energy-efﬁcient because
of the high wireless communication overheads, sub-optimal
training data distribution in individual client devices [ 114], large
degree of system heterogeneity among client edge devices, and
highly-fragmented edge device architectures that make system-
level optimization signiﬁcantly more challenging [ 116]. Note,
the wireless communication energy cost takes up a signiﬁcant
portion of the overall energy footprint of federated learning,
making energy footprint optimization on communication im-
portant.
C. Efﬁciency and Self-Supervised Learning
Self-supervised learning (SSL) have received much attention
in the research community in recent years. SSL methods train
deep neural networks without using explicit supervision in
the form of human-annotated labels for each training sample.
Having humans annotate data is a time-consuming, expensive,
and typically noisy process. SSL methods are typically used
to train foundation models — models that can readily be ﬁne-
tuned using a small amount of labeled data on a down-stream
task [ 117]. SSL methods have been extremely successful for
pre-training large language models, becoming the de-facto
standard, and they have also attracted great interest in computer
vision.
When comparing supervised and self-supervised methods,
there is a glaring trade-off between having labels and the
amount of computational overhead involved in pre-training. For
example, Chen et al. report achieving 69.3% top-1 validation
accuracy with a ResNet-50 model after SSL pre-training for
15
1000 epochs on the ImageNet dataset and using the linear
evaluation protocol, freezing the pre-trained feature extractor,
and ﬁne-tuning a linear classiﬁer on top for 60 epochs using the
full ImageNet dataset with all labels [ 118]. In contrast, the same
model typically achieves at least 76.1% top-1 accuracy after
90 epochs of fully-supervised training. Thus, in this example,
using labels and supervised training is worth a roughly 10 
reduction in training effort, measured in terms of number of
passes over the dataset.
Recent work suggests that incorporating even a small amount
of labeled data can signiﬁcantly bridge this gap. Assran et
al. describe an approach called Predicting view Assignments
With Support samples (PAWS) for semi-supervised pre-training
inspired by SSL [ 119]. With access to labels for just 10% of
the training images in ImageNet, a ResNet-50 achieves 75.5%
top-1 accuracy after just 200 epochs of PAWS pre-training.
Running on 64 V100 GPUs, this takes roughly 16 hours. Similar
observations have recently been made for language model pre-
training as well [120].
Self-supervised pre-training potentially has advantages in
that a single foundation model can be trained (expensive) but
then ﬁne-tuned (inexpensive), amortizing the up front cost
across many tasks [ 117]. Substantial additional research is
needed to better understand the cost-beneﬁt trade-offs for this
paradigm.
16