Title: Reducing malicious use of synthetic media research: Considerations and potential release practices for machine learning

arXiv:1907.11274v2  [cs.CY]  29 Jul 2019REDUCING MALICIOUS USE OF SYNTHETIC MEDIA RESEARCH :
CONSIDERATIONS AND POTENTIAL RELEASE PRACTICES FOR
MACHINE LEARNING
Aviv Ovadya
The Thoughtful Technology Project
aviv.ovadya@thoughtfultech.orgJess Whittlestone
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
University of Cambridge
jlw84@cam.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
The aim of this paper is to facilitate nuanced discussion aro und research norms and practices to
mitigate the harmful impacts of advances in machine learnin g (ML). We focus particularly on the
use of ML to create “synthetic media” (e.g. to generate or man ipulate audio, video, images, and
text), and the question of what publication and release proc esses around such research might look
like, though many of the considerations discussed will appl y to ML research more broadly. We are
not arguing for any speciﬁc approach on when or how research s hould be distributed, but instead try
to lay out some useful tools, analogies, and options for thin king about these issues.
We begin with some background on the idea that ML research mig ht be misused in harmful ways,
and why advances in synthetic media, in particular, are rais ing concerns. We then outline in more
detail some of the different paths to harm from ML research, b efore reviewing research risk miti-
gation strategies in other ﬁelds and identifying component s that seem most worth emulating in the
ML and synthetic media research communities. Next, we outli ne some important dimensions of
disagreement on these issues which risk polarizing convers ations.
Finally, we conclude with recommendations, suggesting tha t the machine learning community might
beneﬁt from: working with subject matter experts to increas e understanding of the risk landscape and
possible mitigation strategies; building a community and n orms around understanding the impacts
of ML research, e.g. through regular workshops at major conf erences; and establishing institutions
and systems to support release practices that would otherwi se be onerous and error-prone.
Keywords synthetic media ·research practices ·release practices ·societal impacts ·negative impacts ·machine
learning·malicious use ·dual-use·deepfakes ·fake news
1 Introduction
Technological advances can result in harm to both individua ls and societal structures, through accidents, unintended
consequences, and malicious use – even as the same advances p rovide incredible beneﬁts. Concern about harms result-
ing from advances in machine learning (ML) have risen dramat ically in recent years, with a growing community of
researchers and practitioners doing crucial work to addres s issues such as the fairness, accountability, and transpar ency
of deployed systems [1]. In this paper, we focus primarily on the ways that advances in ML research might be delib-
erately misused by malicious actors (which we refer to as “ma l-use”) [2], though we also touch on other unintended
consequences.1
1Unintended consequences are also particularly salient for the case of synthetic video and audio, where the simple exist ence of
the technology, regardless of its use, can allow bad actors t o claim that evidence of e.g. corruption or war crimes were sy nthesized
in order to avoid accountability. For example, allegations of videos being faked have been used to justify a coup in Gabon [3], and
exculpate a cabinet minister in Malaysia [4].
DRAFT - JULY 2019
One speciﬁc example of where mal-use concerns have been rais ed recently is around the use of ML in synthetic media2:
the manipulation and generation of increasingly realistic audio, video, images, and text. It is now possible to produce
synthetic images of faces that are almost indistinguishabl e from photographs [5]. It is becoming easier to manipulate
existing videos of people: replacing a person’s facial expr essions or movements with those of another person [6, 7],
and/or overlaying synthesized speech which imitates a pers on’s voice [8]. Language models have advanced to the
point where, given a sentence prompt, they can write article s that appear at least superﬁcially convincing [9]. These
advances could be used to impersonate people, sway public op inion, or more generally spread doubt about the veracity
of all media. Modern synthetic media is in fact already being used for harm: face-swapping tools are being used to
harass journalists [10], synthetic voices are being used fo r ﬁnancial crimes [11], and synthetic faces have allegedly
been used for espionage [12].
These examples bring into focus the need for humility around what we don’t know concerning potential impacts
of technology, and perhaps suggests that we must develop bet ter systems for understanding such impacts. Related
concerns have sparked debate about responsible research pr actices in ML [13], and in particular whether sometimes it
is appropriate to withhold open publication of some aspects of this research.
We begin with some background on the idea that ML research mig ht be misused in harmful ways, and why advances
in synthetic media, in particular, are raising concerns. We then review research risk mitigation strategies in other
ﬁelds and identifying components that may be worth emulatin g in the ML and synthetic media research communities.
Finally, we outline some important dimensions of disagreem ent on these issues which risk polarizing conversations,
before concluding with some recommendations for research a nd practice.
2 How research can lead to harm
How might advances in ML and synthetic media end up resulting in harm? We begin by spelling this out in more
detail: different ways that research might empower malicio us actors, and some possible paths to harm from this.
2.1 Types of hazard
We can distinguish several different types of “information hazard” that might result from machine learning research in
general.3
•Product hazard: Research produces software that can be directly used for har m(e.g. rootkits for computer
hacking). Product hazards increase the likelihood of mal-u se by adversaries with minimal technical capabil-
ities (e.g. ‘script kiddies’ who use existing programs or sc ripts to hack into computers but lack the ability to
write their own, or less sophisticated information warfare operations), or those who have weak motivations
for harm (e.g. online hacking or deception just ‘for fun’).
•Data hazard: research produces detailed information or outputs which if disseminated, create risk of use
for harm (e.g. easy nuclear blueprints; models, training data or cod e for harmful software). Data hazards
increase the likelihood of mal-use by adversaries with some technical capabilities, but without e.g. access to
high-quality researchers.
•Attention hazard: research which directs attention towards an idea or data tha t increases risk (e.g. the idea
that it is possible to use voice-cloning for phishing). Atte ntion hazards increase the likelihood of mal-use by
adversaries who may not have realized that their objectives can be aided by new technologies.
An important thing to note is that potential mitigations wil l bedifferent for each type of hazard – and potentially even
in conﬂict . One way to mitigate attention hazards is to be very careful a bout talking to media organizations and others
with large reach about ways that research advances could be u sed maliciously (such as in voice cloning, for example).
At the same time, raising wider concern about malicious use c ases of ML progress might be exactly what is needed
to incentivize mitigations for data hazards or product haza rds (e.g. some public concern may be required to ensure
that tech platforms prioritize developing technology to id entify voice cloning, or for telecoms to build mitigating
infrastructure to make phone number spooﬁng harder).
2Not all synthetic media techniques involve ML. For example, traditional computer graphics techniques are also used for image
and video manipulation. For simplicity of language, we will not consider these distinctly as the considerations for res earch practices
are very similar.
3This is based loosely on a taxonomy from [14]
2
DRAFT - JULY 2019
2.2 The path to harm
But how might these different types of ‘hazard’ actually lea d to real-world harms? It is worth connecting the dots here
between the theoretical potential for mal-use, and what act ually makes signiﬁcant harm more likely.
Below we talk through some factors inﬂuencing whether a capa bility leads to sustained mal-use in practice. We use
artiﬁcial voice cloning as an illustrative example, as a rel atively new capability with many useful applications (e.g. in
voice translation and audio editing) but also signiﬁcant po tential for mal-use (e.g. in scams, political propaganda, a nd
market manipulation).
1.Awareness : Do actors with malicious intent know about a capability and believe it can help them?
We can break this down into:
•Attention of adversaries : Are malicious actors likely to realize that they could use a new capability
to further their ends? If adversary groups are already using closely related methods, this is much more
likely: for example, if edited voice clips are already being used for political manipulation, groups doing
this are more likely to pay attention to demonstrations of vo ice cloning.
•‘Convincibility’ of those with resources : Are there compelling arguments, perhaps by authoritative
third parties, for the effectiveness of new capabilities? F or example, a scammer who realizes that voice
cloning is useful might need to be able to convince a superior that this technology is effective enough to
justify the costs and overcome institutional inertia.
2.Deployment : How difﬁcult is it for adversaries to weaponize this capabi lity in practice?
For a capability to be deployed for malicious purposes, adve rsaries not only need to be aware but to have the
necessary skills and resources to productize and weaponize the capability. This isn’t a binary – e.g. having
ML expertise vs. not – but rather many different factors will inﬂuence how easy a capability is to weaponize.
At the extreme, we might have a product which can be immediate ly used by anyone, regardless of technical
capability (such as free to use voice cloning software).
Factors that inﬂuence the ease of deployment for mal-use inc lude:
•Talent pipelines : How difﬁcult is it to source someone who can apply a new capab ility for the desired
use case? (e.g. do malicious actors need someone with machin e learning experience, programming
experience, or can they just use a program directly to achiev e their goals?) [12].
•Reproducibility : How difﬁcult is it to reproduce a capability given the infor mation available? (e.g. is it
easy to replicate a voice cloning capability given the avail able papers, models, code, etc.?)
•Modiﬁability : How difﬁcult is it to modify or use a system in order to enable mal-use? (e.g. if a voice
cloning product makes it difﬁcult to clone a voice without co nsent or watermarks, how hard is it to
overcome those limitations?)
•Slottability : Can new capabilities be slotted into existing organizatio nal processes or technical systems?
(e.g. are there already established processes for phone sca ms into which new voice generation capabili-
ties can be slotted easily, without any need to change goals o r strategy?)
•Environmental factors : How does the existing ‘environment’ or ‘infrastructure’ i mpact the usefulness
of the new capability for malicious actors? (E.g. currently , in the US it is easy to ‘spoof’ phone numbers
to make it appear like a call is coming from a family member, wh ich could impact the likelihood of voice
cloning being weaponized for phone scams.)
Websites now enabling anyone to instantly generate seeming ly photorealistic faces are a concrete example
of deployment barriers falling away and making mal-use easi er. It had been possible for well over a year to
generate synthetic images of faces with fairly high quality , but such websites have enabled anyone to do so
with no technical expertise. This capability can also immed iately slot into existing processes, such as fake
account creation. Previously, malicious actors would ofte n use existing photos of real people, which could be
identiﬁed with reverse image search [15], unlike wholly gen erated synthetic images.
3.Sustained use : How likely is it that a capability will lead to sustained use with substantial negative impacts?
Even if adversaries are aware of and able to weaponize some ne w capability, whether or not this leads to
sustained use depends on:
•Actual ROI : If malicious actors believe that the return on investment ( ROI) for using a capability is low
they might not continue to use it in practice. For example, if a form of mal-use is easy to detect, then
adversaries might decide it’s not worth the risk or might be s hut down very quickly.
3
DRAFT - JULY 2019
•Assessment of ROI : If malicious actors have no way of assessing whether new cap abilities are help-
ing them better achieve their goals, or if their assessments are ﬂawed, they might not continue to put
resources into using those capabilities.
2.3 Access ratchets
We can think of this as a kind of progression, from a theoretic al capability to scaled-up use in practice. Once a
technology has progressed down this path and has become easy to use, and proven to have high ROI for mal-use, it
can be much more difﬁcult to address than at earlier stages – w e call this the access ratchet (like a ratchet, increased
access to technology cannot generally be undone). For any ca pability with potential for mal-use, it is therefore worth
thinking about where it currently sits on this progression: how much attention and interest it is receiving; whether it
has been weaponized and/or how costly it would be to do so; and whether it’s likely to be, or already in sustained use.
This can help us think more clearly about where the greatest r isks of mal-use are, and different kinds of interventions
that might be appropriate or necessary in a given situation.
Researchers may argue that a capability is unlikely to cause harm since it has not been used maliciously yet. What
this doesn’t address is the fact that a capability which has n ot yet been used maliciously might sit anywhere along this
progression, which makes a huge difference to how likely it i s to cause harm. For example, Face2Face, a technique
for real-time facial reenactment (i.e. changing a person’s expressions in a video), has existed for 3 years but not
been developed into any products that can easily be used. Thi s lack of productization makes harmful use vastly less
likely, especially given the competition for AI and enginee ring talent today. It is also worth considering how costly
it would be to make a given capability easier to misuse: even t he DeepFake application, which is more accessible to
non-technical users, is currently resource-intensive to w eaponize in practice.
2.4 Indirect harms
Sometimes the path to harm from synthetic media research wil l be fairly direct and immediate: such as a person losing
their money, returning to our example of voice cloning being used in ﬁnancial scams.
But in other cases, improved synthetic media capabilities m ight cause harm in more complex and indirect ways. Con-
sider the case where misinformation purveyors get hold of so phisticated synthetic media capabilities and use them
to win substantial democratic power, which they then use to c ontrol narratives further and undermine any mitigation
efforts (not an uncommon path from democracy to authoritari anism). We can think about this as a disinformation
ratchet : the ability to use disinformation to enhance one’s ability to distribute further disinformation; and the op-
portunity for this type of ratchet can be inﬂuenced by new tec hnology impacting media distribution channels and
capabilities.
These less direct kinds of harms may be harder to anticipate o r imagine, but in the long-run may be much more
important – particularly if they inﬂuence the future develo pment of technology in ways that undermine our ability to
deal with future threats. We suggest that it’s particularly important to consider these kinds of “sociotechnical-path
dependencies” as well as more direct and immediate threats, and what kinds of risk mitigation strategies might best
address them.
3 Mitigating harm through release practices
There is unlikely to be any ‘one size ﬁts all’ solution to miti gating mal-use of ML research: the path to harm will look
very different across contexts, and potential harms need to be weighed against beneﬁts which will also vary depending
on the area. We therefore need discussion about different ap proaches to mitigating mal-use: including around what
research is conducted in the ﬁrst place; standards and proce dures for risk assessment; and processes for deciding when
and how to release different types of research outputs. Here we focus particularly on the latter – how careful release
practices might help mitigate mal-use within ML research.
However, this is not to suggest we think release practices ar e the main or even necessarily the most important com-
ponent of mitigating mal-use. Another crucial piece is how r esearch directions are chosen and prioritized in the ﬁrst
place. This is challenging because much of ML research often involves developing general capabilities which can then
be applied to a variety of different purposes – we can’t simpl y decide to build only ‘beneﬁcial’ ML capabilities. That
aside, we still may be able to say some very general things abo ut the kinds of capabilities that are more likely to be
broadly beneﬁcial, or the kinds of problems that should idea lly be driving ML research. It is also important to think
about what types of research are encouraged/discouraged by conferences, journals, funders, job interviewers and so
on.
4
DRAFT - JULY 2019
3.1 Challenges to mitigating harm
First, it’s worth considering some of the serious challenge s to attempting to decrease harm by limiting access to
research:
•Thecomposition problem : Two independent pieces of research that seem innocent can b e combined in ways
that enable signiﬁcant malicious use.4
•Theslow drip problem : Research advancement can be a slow and continuous evolutio n, where it’s difﬁcult
to draw the line between research that is dangerous and that w hich is not.
•Theconﬂation problem : Many of the underlying goals of various ﬁelds of research (n atural language pro-
cessing, computation photography, etc.) may be directly we aponizable if achieved. For example, the ability
to create convincing dialogue can be used to both support peo ple or manipulate people at scale.
•The defector problem : Even if researchers in some regions or organizations coope ratively decide not to
pursue or publish a particular area of research, those agree ments might not be followed by “defectors” who
then gain a competitive edge.
These challenges may seem daunting even for those who would a dvocate for limiting release of some forms of research.
They also motivate the development of a nuanced menu of optio ns for release practices, and careful evaluation of the
efﬁcacy of whatever measures are chosen. Even without overc oming these challenges, it is possible that release
practices could substantially mitigate harm if they impact the rate of deployment of mal-use technology.5
3.2 A brief tour of analogs in other ﬁelds
There is precedent in several other ﬁelds of research – inclu ding biotechnology and information security – for estab-
lishing processes for reducing the negative risks of resear ch and release. A good ﬁrst step would, therefore, be to
look at what we can learn from these ﬁelds for the case of ML res earch. Here we present some promising practices
identiﬁed from other ﬁelds.
A caveat: just because research norms and processes exist in other ﬁelds, it does not necessarily mean that they are
widely and coherently used in those ﬁelds, or that they provi de a net positive impact. Evaluating which research
practices have been adopted and work well across different ﬁ elds is out of scope for this short paper, but would
certainly be valuable to look into further.
3.2.1 Biosafety
Biosafety processes and principles exist to ensure safe han dling of infective microorganisms in biology/biotechnolo gy
research [16]. Some key components of biosafety practices i nclude:
•Procedures : Steps and rules that must be followed, e.g. for decontamina tion (including basics such as wearing
gloves and shoes).
•Lab safety ofﬁcer : An internal role responsible for enforcing safety.
•Training : Learning safety processes via peers/programs.
•Architecture : Incorporating safety considerations into building and to ol design (e.g. the design of doors and
airﬂow).
•Audits : Providing external accountability, usually at random tim es via local government.
•Safety level designations : Different microorganisms classiﬁed by risk group (e.g. Eb ola is level 4) with
different safety procedures for different levels (e.g. lev el 1 is open bench work, level 4 requires special
clothing, airlock entry, special waste disposal, etc.).
•Safety level deﬁners : Organisations who determine safety levels, e.g. the Cente rs for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC).
4This might be particularly challenging given the success of transfer learning.
5In terms of the ratchet terminology used earlier, delaying r elease of research could slow down the speed of an ‘access rat chet’
(i.e. slowing down widespread access to a technology), pote ntially providing enough extra time strengthen a ‘sociotec hnical immune
system’ that could halt a disinformation ratchet.
5
DRAFT - JULY 2019
3.2.2 Computer/Information security
Various practices exist in the ﬁeld of information security to prevent exploitation of vulnerabilities in important sy stems.
Key components include:
•OPSEC (‘operations security’) : Procedures for identifying and protecting critical infor mation that could be
used by adversaries. Includes identiﬁcation of critical in formation, analysis of threats, vulnerabilities, and
risks, and application of appropriate measures.
•Architecture : Use systems that are “secure by design” and so keep you secur e automatically where possible.
•Coordinated/responsible disclosure : Processes to ensure that exploits which could affect impor tant systems
are not publicly disclosed until there has been an opportuni ty to ﬁx the vulnerability.
•ISACs/CERTs (Information Sharing & Analysis Centers/Computer Emergen cy Response Teams): Disclosure
coordination entities.
3.2.3 Institutional Review Boards (IRBs)
IRBs are designed to protect human subjects in biomedical an d behavioral research (including e.g. clinical trials of
new drugs or devices and psychology studies of behavior, opi nions or attitudes) [17]:
•Case dependent scrutiny : Research proposals are assessed on a case-by-case basis us ing external expert
evaluation, and are determined to either be: (a) exempt (whe n risks are minimal), (b) expedited (slightly
more than minimal risk), or (c) full review (all other propos als).
•Approval rubrics : Criteria for approval of research proposals include: havi ng sound research principles to
minimize risk to subjects; establishing that risks to subje cts are reasonable relative to anticipated beneﬁts;
selecting subjects in equitable ways, and avoiding undue em phasis on a vulnerable population.
•External expert & community evaluation : Studies are reviewed by people who have expertise in the res earch
and in the impacts of the work (such as community members).
•Continuous evaluation : Process can be ongoing, not one-time, with periodic update s: the IRB can suspend
or terminate previously approved research.
This is not meant to be exhaustive but demonstrates a variety of systems that have been used to mitigate negative
risks of research and release. Other analogs worth explorin g include those around nuclear technology, spam detection,
classiﬁed information, and environmental impact.
3.3 Potential release practices
What should ML and synthetic media research emulate from the se other ﬁelds? Many aspects of these practices and
processes may be applicable in ML research, including parti cularly: external expert evaluation of risks and appropri-
ate responses, coordinated/responsible disclosure, trai ning in responsible research processes, disclosure coordi nation
entities, safety level designations, safety level deﬁning entities, and case-dependent response (depending on safet y
levels).
Reframing and renaming all of these practices and processes to focus on the release of potentially hazardous ML
systems leaves us with the following components that may be n eeded in ML:
•Release options : Different options for release.
•Release rubric : Guidelines for when to use each type (decided by case-depen dent evaluation).
•Release rubric processes : How to do case-dependent evaluation.
•Release coordination : Who decides/gets access.
•Release training : How to learn processes/norms.
•Release process entities : Who manages all of this?
Each of these components can be broken down further; we explo re “release options” here as an example.
6
DRAFT - JULY 2019
3.4 Release options
The question of how to release research with potential for ma l-use is not a binary one: there are many different choices
to make beyond simply ‘release’ or ‘don’t release’. Focusin g on this binary choice can lead the debate around openness
of ML research to become very polarized.
Some important dimensions we might consider when thinking a bout release strategies include:
•Content: What is released
Potential options include:
–A fully runnable system (with varying power)
–A modiﬁable system (with varying modiﬁability)
–Source code (varying versions)
–Training data (varying sizes)
–Trained models (varying strength/ﬁne-tunability/data-n eeds)
–Paper/concept (varying detail level)
–Harmful use case ideas (varying detail level)
•Timing: When it is released
Potential options include:
–Immediate release
–Timed release: Set a speciﬁc time to release components, all owing time for mitigation of any potential
harms. This is common in information security.
–Periodic evaluation: Don’t release immediately, but set a t ime period/intervals (e.g. every 2 months), at
which point an evaluation is done to reassess the risk of rele ase given mitigation progress.
–Evented release: Wait to release until some particular type of external event (e.g. someone else replicat-
ing or publicizing the same technology).
–Staged release: Release systems of successively increasin g levels of power on a ﬁxed timeline, or trig-
gered by external events.
•Distribution: Where/Who it is released to
Potential options include:
–Public access (with varying degrees of publicity)
–Ask for access: Anyone who wants access to data or a system ask s and is approved on a case-by-case
basis, potentially with speciﬁc requirements around use.
–Release safety levels: People and possibly organizations c an request to be recognized as ‘safe’, after
auditing and approval they gain the ability to access all mat erial at a given safety level.
–Access communities: Research groups developing their own t rusted communities through informal pro-
cesses which all have access to shared repositories.
Within the domain of synthetic media, it’s worth diving deep er into potential mitigations speciﬁc to products, models,
and demos relevant to that space.
There are a number of mechanisms researchers and companies c an use to reduce malicious use from general synthetic
media systems that allow e.g. virtual impersonation:
•Consent : Requiring consent by those being impersonated.
•Detectability : Intentionally not trying to thwart detection.
•Watermarking : Embedding context about modiﬁcations/original.
•Referenceability : Centrally storing all modiﬁcations for reference.
It’s important to note that none of these are perfect – they ar e part of a “defense in depth”. It is also possible to add
constraints on synthesis (e.g. ensuring that only particul ar faces can be generated through the system).
7
DRAFT - JULY 2019
3.5 Examples in practice
This menu of options is valuable in theory, but it’s also wort h brieﬂy exploring some examples in practice. One of
the most notable public positions in this space comes from Go ogle: “We generally seek to share Google research to
contribute to growing the wider AI ecosystem. However we do n ot make it available without ﬁrst reviewing the po-
tential risks for abuse. Although each review is content spe ciﬁc, key factors that we consider in making this judgment
include: risk and scale of beneﬁt vs downside, nature and uni queness, and mitigation options.” [18]
Beyond Google, a number of labs have had to consider these iss ues. As mentioned earlier, the researchers behind
Face2Face and those behind many other synthetic media syste ms have chosen not to share their code. Some researchers
have released code but intentionally made it difﬁcult to use for non-experts.
Different product companies in this space are also explorin g mitigations.6Synthesia is only working with closely
vetted clients. Lyrebird, which enables voice cloning, mak es it more difﬁcult to impersonate someone without consent
by requiring users to speak particular phrases instead of ju st training on arbitrary provided data.
4 Disagreements around release practices
Different people and groups will have differing views on whi ch kinds of release strategies should be used when. Here
we lay out some different dimensions on which people may disa gree which affect their views about release strategies
for ML research. Our aim is to recognize that genuine divides exist and can lead to polarization of opinion, but that
more nuanced discussion can prevent this.
4.1 Value trade-offs
Some disagreements stem from fundamental views about the va lue of openness vs. caution in research.
The ML community has very strong norms around openness: free sharing of data, algorithms, models, and research
papers. These strong openness norms appear to be broadly mot ivated by (1) distributing the beneﬁts of research
widely by making it accessible to all of society, and (2) enab ling scientiﬁc progress by making it easier for researchers
to critique and build on one another’s work.
Research practices that attempt to limit mal-use by being mo re cautious about how it is released and distributed
necessarily reduce some forms of openness. Some who take ope nness to be a fundamental value in research may
therefore disagree with such practices on principle. Howev er, there are multiple different aspects to openness in
research, and, as we’ve tried to highlight in this paper, mul tiple different approaches to being cautious about researc h
release. Not all of these will necessarily be in tension with one another, and more exploration of research practices
that decrease risk while protecting the most important aspe cts of openness would be valuable.
4.2 Beliefs about risks
Some disagree about the relative size of different risks inv olved in ML research.
On the one hand, there is the risk that advances in ML might be m isused by malicious actors in potentially catastrophic
ways, which we’ve discussed. But restricting the release of ML research also creates its own risks: (1) of increasing
power concentration, as a few research groups disproportio nately control how ML capabilities evolve, and (2) of
creating public confusion or even panic, by creating the imp ression that advances are more threatening than they are.
Beliefs about the relative size of these risks can lead to two very different perspectives. Those who believe that ML
advances will lead to signiﬁcant harm very soon may want to ri sk such power concentration in order to safeguard
democracy and public trust in the long term. By contrast, for those who think weaponization is less immediately
relevant and that we can reassess risks in the future, the cos ts of restricting research may seem less palatable.
While there is a genuine tension here, it is worth considerin g approaches that could address both sides of the concern
(or at least address one side without exacerbating the other .) For example, some standardization of release practices,
potentially managed by external entities, could help mitig ate misuse without leading to power concentration.
6For more on this, see this crowdsourced list of organization s and their actions to mitigate risk: http://bit.ly/synth- ethics.
8
DRAFT - JULY 2019
4.3 Beliefs about efﬁcacy
Another dimension of disagreement centers not around what t he risks are but how effective different practices are
likely to be at reducing them.
Given strong incentives or low barriers to develop a technol ogy (or achieve an insight), some suggest it is impossible
to prevent either from leading to mal-use the long run, which could mean that restricting the release of research with
potential for mal-use is futile. Others suggest that we can s igniﬁcantly impact incentives or barriers, or that slowing
down release into the world can still make a signiﬁcant diffe rence, especially if this gives us time to build defenses
against potential mal-use. There is also the perspective th at it is easier to build systems to defend against mal-use if
more research is public, and the counterview that public inf ormation can sometimes help attackers more than defenders
(‘security through obscurity’ may be unnecessary for e.g. k eeping data private but is still allegedly crucial for anti-
spam defense). As ML researchers continue to experiment wit h release practices and explore similar challenges in
other ﬁelds, we may learn about the efﬁcacy of different appr oaches which can help inform these beliefs.
4.4 Beliefs about future needs
Finally, there’s a question of whether we might eventually n eed processes for release of ML research, even if they’re
not essential now.
For those who believe that we might develop much more advance d ML systems in the relatively near future, and
that potential for harm will increase with these advances, t hen it probably makes sense to start developing careful
norms and processes now regardless of current harms. For tho se who are more skeptical of the possibility of much
more advanced capabilities, think that such capabilities a re unlikely to be dangerous, and/or that restricting releas e is
unlikely to be effective in the future regardless, developi ng such processes now looks unnecessary.
*
Part of the reason for laying out various different options f or release of research is to show that this needn’t be a
polarized debate: it’s not a simple choice between ‘open’ or ‘closed’ ML research. It’s worth considering whether,
within our menu of options, there are approaches which can st rike a balance between the differing perspectives outlined
here.
5 Recommendations
We’ve laid out some considerations, tools, and options for t hinking through release of potentially harmful research in
a nuanced way. But what must be done now? Here are some brief re commendations:
1.Increase understanding of the risk landscape and possible mitigation strategies:
•Develop standardized language for talking about these issues e.g. around hazards, adversa ries, mitiga-
tions and release options.
•Map risks of different types of ML research in collaboration with subj ect matter experts, such as e.g.
misinformation security researchers for synthetic media. Map out both immediate direct threats and
potential longer-term path dependencies, in ways that addr ess researcher concerns around risk hyperbole.
Develop practices for safely discussing such risks.7
•Map mitigation options , e.g. ways of reducing the harms resulting from mal-use of sy nthetic media
research, and the stages/times at which they are applicable .
2.Build a community and norms around competency in understanding the impacts of ML resear ch:
•Establish regular workshops to focus on release challenges.
•Spread awareness of the risks of ML research to both groups who might be affecte d and who can help
mitigate the risks. Proactively seek to include and learn fr om those who have been impacted.
•Encourage impact evaluation both positive and negative, for research publications, pre sentations, and
proposals (such as that proposed by the ACM FCA [19]).
3.Fund institutions and systems to grow and manage research practices in ML, including poten tially:
7This type of investigation might also be referred to as e.g. t hreat models, risk analysis, or impact analysis, each of whi ch
involves a different set of useful lenses.
9
DRAFT - JULY 2019
•Support expert impact evaluation of research proposals, so that the burden of this does not fal l entirely
on individual researchers (who may not have the relevant exp ertise to assess hazards). This might in-
volve e.g. identifying groups with subject matter expertis e who can do evaluations (at the request of
researchers), coordinating, and potentially even paying f or review.
•Prototype vetting systems to help enable shared access to potentially sensitive resea rch (as opposed to
the current system where researchers attempt to validate if those requesting their models are malicious
actors [20], often via error-prone ad-hoc Googling).
•Develop release procedures for research already deemed to raise potential risks (manag ing all of the
above if needed, so that individual researchers can spend mo re time on actual research while still miti-
gating risks). Currently, organizations are unilaterally not publicly releasing results, so developing better
procedures could actually open up research.
6 Conclusion
It is clear that advances in ML have the potential to be misuse d: the main example we have discussed here is how
advances in synthetic media creation may be used to sow disin formation and mistrust (but many others can be, and
have been discussed [2]). We must start thinking about how to responsibly safeguard ML research.
Here we focus on the role of release and publication practice s in preventing mal-use of ML research. The idea that we
might sometimes restrict research release has been met with understandable concern from parts of the ML community
for whom openness is an important value. Our aim here has been to decrease polarization in this debate; to emphasize
that this is not a simple choice between “open” and “closed” M L research. There are a variety of options for how
and when different aspects of research are released, includ ing many drawn from parallels to existing ﬁelds, and many
possible processes for making these decisions.
There will always be disagreements about the relative risks and beneﬁts of different types of research, the effectivene ss
of different mitigation strategies, and ultimately how to b alance the values of openness vs. caution. We must more
deeply explore the risks and options, and develop release st rategies and processes that appropriately balance and
manage the trade-offs.
Ultimately, we want research to beneﬁt humanity. We see this work as part of a maturing of the ML community,
alongside crucial efforts to ensure that ML systems are fair , transparent, and accountable. As ML reshapes our lives,
researchers will continue to come to terms with their new pow ers and impacts on world affairs.
References
[1] Jess Whittlestone, Rune Nyrup, Anna Alexandrova, Kanta Dihal, and Stephen Cave. Ethical and Societal Impli-
cations of Algorithms, Data, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence: a Roadmap for Research. London: Nufﬁeld Foundation ,
2019.
[2] Miles Brundage, Shahar Avin, Jack Clark, Helen Toner, Pe ter Eckersley, Ben Garﬁnkel, Allan Dafoe, Paul
Scharre, Thomas Zeitzoff, Bobby Filar, et al. The Malicious Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Forecasting, Preven-
tion, and Mitigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07228 , 2018.
[3] Ali Breland. The Bizarre and Terrifying Case of the “Deep fake” Video that Helped Bring an African Nation to
the Brink. Mother Jones , 2019.
[4] Nic Ker. Is the political aide viral sex video confession real or a Deepfake? Malay Mail , 2019.
[5] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A Style-Based G enerator Architecture for Generative Adversarial
Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pa ttern Recognition , pages 4401–
4410, 2019.
[6] Caroline Chan, Shiry Ginosar, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Everybody Dance Now. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.07371 , 2018.
[7] Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger, Chri stian Theobalt, and Matthias Nießner. Face2face: Real-
time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 2387–2395, 2016.
[8] RJ Skerry-Ryan, Eric Battenberg, Ying Xiao, Yuxuan Wang , Daisy Stanton, Joel Shor, Ron J Weiss, Rob Clark,
and Rif A Saurous. Towards End-to-End Prosody Transfer for E xpressive Speech Synthesis with Tacotron. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.09047 , 2018.
10
DRAFT - JULY 2019
[9] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language Models are
Unsupervised Multitask Learners. OpenAI Blog , 1(8), 2019.
[10] Drew Harwell. Fake-porn videos are being weaponized to harass and humiliate women: ‘Everybody is a potential
target’. Washington Post , December 2018.
[11] BBC News. Fake voices ‘help cyber-crooks steal cash’, J uly 2019.
[12] Raphael Satter. Experts: Spy used AI-generated face to connect with targets. AP News , June 2019.
[13] Claire Leibowicz, Steven Adler, and Peter Eckersley. W hen Is it Appropriate to Publish High-Stakes AI Re-
search? Partnership on AI blog post, April 2019.
[14] Nick Bostrom. Information Hazards: A Typology of Poten tial Harms from Knowledge. Review of Contemporary
Philosophy , 10:44–79, 2011.
[15] Gregory Goth. Propaganda Bots vs. Transparency. ACM News , 2017.
[16] World Health Organization. Laboratory Biosafety Manual . Geneva: World Health Organization, 2004.
[17] Kyle B Enﬁeld and Jonathon D Truwit. The Purpose, Compos ition, and Function of an Institutional Review
Board: Balancing Priorities. Respiratory care , 53(10):1330–1336, 2008.
[18] Google. Perspectives on Issues in AI Governance, 2019.
[19] Brent Hecht, L Wilcox, JP Bigham, J Schöning, E Hoque, J E rnst, Y Bisk, L De Russis, L Yarosh, B Anjum,
et al. It’s Time to Do Something: Mitigating the Negative Imp acts of Computing Through a Change to the Peer
Review Process. ACM Future of Computing Blog , 2018.
[20] Rowan Zellers. Why We Released Grover, July 2019.
We are grateful to the many researchers across academia, ind ustry, and civil society who provided invaluable feedback.
This is meant to be just the start of a conversation, and we are likely to update this document as we learn more. If you
have thoughts or feedback, or would like to otherwise contri bute to this discussion, please reach out to the authors via
email or on Twitter.
11