Title: Back to the Future: On Potential Histories in NLP

Back to the Future: On Potential Histories in NLP
Zeerak Talat
Digital Democracies Institute
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, Canada
zeerak_talat@sfu.caAnne Lauscher
Data Science Group
University of Hamburg
Hamburg, Germany
anne.lauscher@uni-hamburg.de
Abstract
Machine learning and NLP require the con-
struction of datasets to train and ﬁne-tune mod-
els. In this context, previous work has demon-
strated the sensitivity of these data sets. For
instance, potential societal biases in this data
are likely to be encoded and to be ampliﬁed
in the models we deploy. In this work, we
draw from developments in the ﬁeld of his-
tory and take a novel perspective on these prob-
lems: considering datasets and models through
thelens of historical ﬁction surfaces their po-
litical nature, and affords re-conﬁguring how
we view the past, such that marginalized dis-
courses are surfaced. Building on such in-
sights, we argue that contemporary methods
for machine learning are prejudiced towards
dominant and hegemonic histories. Employ-
ing the example of neopronouns, we show that
by surfacing marginalized histories within con-
temporary conditions, we can create models
that better represent the lived realities of tra-
ditionally marginalized and excluded commu-
nities.
1 Introduction
The state-of-the art in NLP requires, among other
steps, selecting ,sampling , and annotating data
sets which we can then use to train large machine
learning (ML) models (e.g., Devlin et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2019). Previous work has shown that this is a
sensitive process: for instance, potential societal bi-
ases present in the data are prone to be encoded and
even ampliﬁed in our models and might jeopardize
fairness (e.g., Blodgett et al., 2020). Researchers
have thus argued that ML for NLP should be
handled with care, and have proposed measures
designed to counter potential ethical issues, e.g.,
viaaugmenting datasets (Zhao et al., 2018). In
this work, we argue that all these steps along the
ML pipeline are in fact acts of historical ﬁction .
Historical ﬁction is a ﬁeld of study in which history
is constructed as a plurality rather than a singularentity or timeline (White, 2005). What the ﬁeld of
historical ﬁction affords is drawing out marginal-
ized and minoritized histories that have otherwise
been forgotten or suppressed (White, 2005). In
contrast, traditional history creates histories from
linear timelines and emphasizes the dominant
norms (Foucault, 2013). Here we argue: if the
act of creating a history then, is creating a ﬁction
through which we can understand the past, then
the creation of datasets for ML and training ML
models similarly engage in acts of historical ﬁction.
However, rather than highlighting marginalized nar-
ratives or histories, mainstream ML draws out the
majoritarian histories. This occurs at the expense of
marginalized narratives, giving rise to the marginal-
ization that ML performs. In this way, current ML
is a conservative practice, which polices and limits
the expression of marginalized discourses, and
thereby the existence of marginalized people.
In this paper, we acknowledge the potential
of historical ﬁction for fairer NLP. Strongly
believing that our community can proﬁt from this
novel perspective, we a) introduce its theoretical
background; b) review different possibilities of
how NLP is currently performing acts of historical
ﬁction; and c) demonstrate through case study how
to construct histories for ML that are progressive
by explicitly including the lived realities of groups
that have otherwise been marginalized. We show
that such constructions strongly impact the ways
in which models come to embody information
(Talat et al., 2021). Here, we resort to the case of
neo-pronouns (novel and yet established pronouns),
to showcase how a simple heuristic ﬁction process
impacts how models embody these. Concretely, we
replace gendered pronouns with a gender-neutral
neo-pronoun and adopt existing model special-
ization methods (e.g., Lauscher et al., 2021), for
injecting a potential history. Training a model on
our ﬁction data shifts a marginalized pronoun from
the edges of the vector space towards majoritarianarXiv:2210.06245v1  [cs.CL]  12 Oct 2022
pronouns. Using this example, we discuss how
the underlying data inﬂuences the production and
operationalization of socio-political constructs,
e.g., gender, in ML systems.
We hope that our work inspires more NLP re-
searchers and practitioners to think about steps in
ML as acts of historical ﬁction, leading to more
plurality and thus, fairer and more inclusive NLP.
2 Background
Data-making has been conceptualized as ﬁction
(e.g. Gitelman, 2013) and ML researchers have also
begun to conceptualize ML, and data, as subjective
(Talat et al., 2021) and value-laden (Birhane et al.,
2022). Here, we lay the foundation for considering
ML through the lens of historical ﬁction.
2.1 Historical Fiction
In his foundational text, “The Archaeology of
Knowledge” , Foucault (2013) argues that history as
a ﬁeld has been pre-occupied with the construction
of linear timelines rather than constructing narra-
tives, in efforts to describe the past. Describing this
distinction, White (2005) notes that “historical dis-
course wages everything on the true, while ﬁctional
discourse is interested in the real.” That is, through
engaging with ﬁction, we are afforded knowledge
and understanding of the realities of life in the pe-
riod that is under investigation. Moreover, through
purposefully engaging with historical ﬁction, his-
tories that have otherwise been marginalized can
be surfaced (White, 2005). Imagining histories
in opposition to hegemony can provide space for
viewing our contemporary conditions through the
lens of values in our past that have been neglected.
The resulting timelines are what Azoulay (2019)
terms potential histories .
2.2 Machine Learning and NLP
ML has been critiqued for its discriminatory and
hegemonic outcomes from multiple ﬁelds (Ben-
jamin, 2019; Blodgett et al., 2021; Bolukbasi et al.,
2016), which has lead to a number of methods
that address the issue of discrimination by propos-
ing to “debias” ML models (e.g. De-Arteaga et al.,
2019; Dixon et al., 2018; Lauscher et al., 2020).
Early efforts have however been complicated by
notions of ‘bias’ being under-speciﬁed (for further
detail see Blodgett et al., 2020). Zhao et al. (2018)
perform data augmentation, with a goal of a less
gender-biased co-reference solution system. Mov-ing a step further, Qian et al. (2022) collect data
perturbed along demographic lines by humans, and
train an automated perturber, and a language model
trained on the perturbed data. Although such ar-
tifacts can be used towards efforts to debias, the
artifacts can also be used to situate models within
desired contexts. Other works provide critiques
from theoretical perspectives. For instance, Talat
et al. (2021) critique the disembodied view that the
ML practice and practitioners take, arguing that
“social bias is inherent” to data making and model-
ing practices. Rogers (2021) argues that through
carefully curating data along desired values, ML
can constitute a progressive practice. Finally, So-
laiman and Dennison (2021) propose ﬁne-tuning
language models on curated data, which seeks to
shift language models away from producing toxic,
i.e. abusive content. Such work stands in contrast
to a large body of literature, which uncritically col-
lects and uses data, with the result of producing ML
models that recreate discriminatory contemporaries
(e.g. Green and Viljoen, 2020; Gitelman, 2013).
Viewing ML through the lens of historical ﬁc-
tion, we argue that ML engages in creating ﬁctions,
without awareness. For instance, in the creation
of data (Gitelman, 2013) and in the ampliﬁcation
of dominant discourses (Zhao et al., 2017). The
predominant function of these ﬁctions has been to
imagine a single past that reﬂect hegemonic trends
in our contemporary. Here, we provide a case-
study that illustrates the possibility of imagining
pasts that reﬂect our current conditions, through
constructing a ﬁction (i.e., a data set and a model
which we train on this data) that is oppositional
to hegemony. Through deploying these ﬁctions
of the past (i.e., data sets and corresponding ML
models) in productive settings, we are, as a society,
able to shape futures that are more aligned with our
ﬁctions of relalities that were formerly oppressed.
3 Experiments: Neopronoun-Fiction
We describe a showcase which demonstrates the
idea behind historical ﬁction in NLP: we study the
case of the neopronoun “xe” . Neopronouns are
not yet established pronouns (McGaughey, 2020).
They are an important example of language change
and are mostly used by individuals belonging to
already marginalized groups, e.g., non-binary indi-
viduals (e.g., see the overview by Lauscher et al.,
2022). NLP has long been ignoring neopronouns,
leading to exclusion of these individuals in lan-
guage technology (Cao and Daumé III, 2021; Dev
et al., 2021). We argue that we can write the poten-
tial history of “xe” being an established pronoun
through simple data pertubation to change how pre-
trained language models (PLMs) “perceive” the
past. We hypothesize that through deploying such
anti- discrimination models, we can shift the hege-
monic nature of ML. Note, that we could use a sim-
ilar approach for other neo-pronouns, e.g., nounself
pronouns (Miltersen, 2016), etc. Similarly, the gen-
eral idea of selecting, augmenting, pertubating, and
curating data to write potential histories can be used
to create other historical ﬁction-models focused on
larger ideological aspects beyond single words.
3.1 History-Injection Methods
We compare two straight-forward methods for the
injection of the potential history of xeinto PLMs,
which have been used successfully for related cases
of reﬁnement of PLMs, e.g., domain specializa-
tion (e.g., Hung et al., 2022), and debiasing (e.g.,
Lauscher et al., 2021): (i) intermediate model train-
ing via standard full ﬁne-tuning (e.g., Devlin et al.,
2019), and (ii) adapter-based (Houlsby et al., 2019)
history-injection. In (i), we run simple language
modeling on ﬁction data, thereby ﬁne-tuning the
whole PLM. In contrast, in (ii), we inject light-
weight bottleneck adapter-layers into the PLM.
Here, we employ the architecture proposed by
Pfeiffer et al. (2020b). During language modeling,
we only adjust those parameters and keep the origi-
nal parameters frozen. This increases the efﬁciency
of our approach, as the adapter-layers are typically
much smaller (in our case, we apply a reduction
factor of 16), and we avoid the catastrophic forget-
ting of the already acquired knowledge of the PLM.
Additionally, we modularize historical ﬁction: our
adapters contain a potential history, which we can
turn off and on on demand, and ﬂexibily combine
with other potential histories (Pfeiffer et al., 2021).
3.2 Experimental Setup
Data. We start from the English Wikipedia
“wikitext-103-v1” data set (Merity et al., 2016)
available on Huggingface Datasets.1It con-
sists of a training, validation, and testing portion
with1;801;350sequences, 3;760sequences, and
4;358sequences, respectively. Next, we perturb
the data: to this end, we loop over each token in
1https://huggingface.co/datasets/
wikitextthe data set. If the token is a singular gendered pro-
noun (i.e., he,she, and corresponding grammatical
cases), we replace the pronoun with the correspond-
ing case of the neopronoun xe. We take care to
always replace with the right form using additional
information from a part-of-speech tagging (POS)
analysis. For instance, hercan be the possessive de-
pendent or accusative case. Through the POS-tag
according to the Penn Treebank Project (Santorini,
1990), i.e., PRP for personal pronouns, and PRP$
for possessive pronouns, we can distinguish these
cases and assign xemorxyr, respectively.
Evaluation Measure. Lacking standard tests for
the intrinsic evaluation of neopronoun knowledge
in PLMs, we resort to the following evaluation
regime: ﬁrst, we build a set of gendered pronouns
(Vg) consisting of each grammatical form of a gen-
dered singular pronoun (i.e., she,her, etc. and he,
him, etc.) and a set for our gender-neutral neo-
pronoun ( Vn) with the grammatical forms of xe,
respectively. In addition, we consider the word
person (p). For each of the tokens, we then ex-
tract static embeddings from the model using the
same procedure as Vuli ´c et al. (2020). To this end,
we surround the word with the models’ sequence
start and end tokens and input the sequence into
the model. For each token in the sequence, we
compute a static representation xias the average of
the representations from layers m:n. To induce a
word representation w, we average representations
over all consecutive ranges [m:n],mn. Using
the word representations w, we then compute the
difference in average similarity between VgandVn
towards pas
d(p; Vg; Vn)=1
jVgjX
wg2Vgcos(p;wg) 1
jVnjX
wn2Vncos(p;wn);(1)
with cos(;)as the cosine similarity. A higher
value of dcorresponds to gendered pronouns being
more similar to person than the forms of xe. We
couple this quantitative evaluation with a qualita-
tive analysis of the topology of the space, using the
same static embeddings extracted from the PLM.
Model and Optimization. We use RoBERTa
from Huggingface Transformers (Wolf et al.,
2020)2inlarge conﬁguration (24 layers, 16 heads,
1024 hidden size). For the adapter-based injec-
tion we use Adapter Transformers (Pfeiffer et al.,
2020a). We train the models with a batch size of 32
2https://huggingface.com
(a) Original
 (b)Xe-Fiction(Full Fine-tuning)
 (c)Xe-Fiction (Adapter-Fine-tuning)
Figure 1: Results for our neopronoun-ﬁction experiments. We depict the difference in average similarity between
gendered and gender-neutral pronouns towards the word person computed with static embeddings extracted from
layers [m:n],mn. A positive value (red color) indicates gendered pronouns being closer to person .
she
her
hersherself
xexem
xyrxyrsxemself
hehim
hishimself
person
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3−0.2−0.100.10.20.3
Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js
(a) Original
she
herhersherself
xexem
xyr xyrsxemself
hehim
hishimself
person
−0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2−0.2−0.100.10.20.3
Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js (b)Xe-Fiction (Full Fine-tuning)
she
herhersherself
xexem
xyrxyrsxemself
hehim
hishimself
person
−0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2−0.100.10.20.3
Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js (c)Xe-Fiction (Adapter-Fine-tuning)
Figure 2: Topology of static embedding spaces extracted from layers 0–24 of (a) original RoBERTa large , (b) the
Xe-Fiction model fully ﬁne-tuned, and (c) the adapter-based Xe-Fiction model. We show the embeddings of the
forms of gendered pronouns and of xeand of person projected in 2D-space via Principal Component Analysis.
and a learning rate of 110 4on our ﬁction Wiki
using Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) for maximum
50epochs. We apply early stopping based on the
validation set perplexity (patience: 2epochs).
3.3 Results and Discussion.
The results of our neopronoun-ﬁction showcase are
depicted in Figures 1a–1c. Across almost all layer
combinations, embeddings extracted from the orig-
inal RoBERTa large are skewed towards gendered
pronouns. In contrast, in our Xe-Fiction models,
we were able to reﬁne the Transformer representa-
tions towards forms of xe. The xe-embeddings from
the full ﬁne-tuning history-injection are closer to
person than the gendered pronouns almost for any
layer combination. For the adapter-based history-
injection, we can see a softer adjustment. The qual-
itative analysis of the topology of the static embed-
ding space (Figures 2a–2c) yields a similar picture:in the original model (Figure 2a) the grammatical
forms of xewere pushed towards the edge of the
embedding space. In contrast, in the Xe-Fiction
models, xe-pronouns are closer to person .
4 Conclusion
The issue of socially discriminatory ML partially
stems from the reliance on data and architectures
that forefront discriminatory pasts and contempo-
raries. Here, we propose the deliberate use of histor-
ical ﬁction as a lens to understand potential issues
in ML and to create data and models that narrate the
real, rather than the hegemonic. By creating a sim-
ple dataset that ﬁctionalizes a contemporary with
greater social inclusion of neopronouns, we have
shown how PLMs can come to more accurately
represent the world. However, the scope of ﬁction-
alizing for NLP extends far beyond pronouns to
other gendered and racialized inequities and wider
social issues. Thus, there is ample space for future
work to create ﬁctions which seek to embed more
equal representations of demographic groups and
social issues. We conclude that historical ﬁction
can address the difﬁcult question of creating mod-
els that embody worlds more closely related to our
own and provide NLP practitioners with methods
that surface the real, rather than the factual.
5 Limitations
Energy Consumption and Environmental Im-
pacts Our experiments highlight two modes of
ﬁctionalizing just futures in PLMs: adding a post-
hoc ﬁne-tuning step and creating ﬁctions within the
optimization dataset. Choosing the former method
adds another step in the machine learning pipeline,
which will have negative costs for carbon emis-
sions and the sustainability of developing machine
learning models. We therefore advocate for the
latter: by ﬁctionalizing within the existing steps
in the machine learning pipeline, researchers and
practitioners can avoid incurring additional carbon
costs (see Strubell et al., 2019; Dodge et al., 2022)
of creating narratives within machine learning.
Shifting Opinions While our work affords to
more accurately describe the realities experienced
in the world, i.e. more accurately describe pronoun
use, our experiments and models are subject to
the pronouns that are currently in use, that we are
aware of. As gender is constantly in ﬂux and con-
ﬂict and subject to the experiences of individuals,
the existence of current pronouns may cease while
new may come to express a more ﬁne-grained un-
derstanding of gendered and genderless existence.
Dual Use Creating data which ﬁctionalizes our
contemporary can be used to create data and mod-
els that more accurately represent marginalized dis-
courses. On the other hand, it can also be used
to reinforce marginalizing discourses. Although
a large body within machine learning does this,
we believe that it is a by-product of data-driven
machine learning being a relatively young ﬁeld,
rather than a product of malice. However, should
a machine learning practitioner seek to erase cer-
tain histories and people, ﬁctionalizing data which
erases their existence could provide an avenue for
such erasure.
Limitations of data For our method, we are only
using a very limited dataset, constructed for the ex-
plicit purposes of providing an example of howhistorical ﬁction can be used when applied pur-
posefully to machine learning. Our data is likely to
have constructions of pronouns that are not accu-
rate with real-world application. For a more consid-
erate dataset, we direct readers to the work of Qian
et al. (2022), who performed in-depth analyses and
corrections of incorrect and incoherent pronoun
use. Further, our work serves as an illustration of
the uses of historical ﬁction, and we suggest that
readers deliberately consider the particular ﬁctions
that provide avenues for their objects of research.
References
Ariella Azoulay. 2019. Potential history: unlearn-
ing imperialism . Verso, London ; Brooklyn, NY .
OCLC: on1124512424.
Ruha Benjamin. 2019. Race after technology: aboli-
tionist tools for the new Jim code . Polity, Medford,
MA.
Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dallas Card,
William Agnew, Ravit Dotan, and Michelle Bao.
2022. The Values Encoded in Machine Learning
Research. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency , pages 173–184,
Seoul Republic of Korea. ACM.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and
Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (Technology) is
Power: A Critical Survey of “Bias” in NLP. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5454–
5476, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Su Lin Blodgett, Gilsinia Lopez, Alexandra Olteanu,
Robert Sim, and Hanna Wallach. 2021. Stereotyp-
ing Norwegian Salmon: An Inventory of Pitfalls in
Fairness Benchmark Datasets. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1004–1015, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. 2016.
Man is to Computer Programmer as Woman is to
Homemaker? Debiasing Word Embeddings. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 29. Curran Associates, Inc.
Yang Trista Cao and Hal Daumé III. 2021. To-
ward gender-inclusive coreference resolution: An
analysis of gender and bias throughout the ma-
chine learning lifecycle*. Computational Linguis-
tics, 47(3):615–661.
Maria De-Arteaga, Alexey Romanov, Hanna Wal-
lach, Jennifer Chayes, Christian Borgs, Alexandra
Chouldechova, Sahin Geyik, Krishnaram Kentha-
padi, and Adam Tauman Kalai. 2019. Bias in Bios:
A Case Study of Semantic Representation Bias in a
High-Stakes Setting. In Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,
pages 120–128, Atlanta GA USA. ACM.
Sunipa Dev, Masoud Monajatipoor, Anaelia Ovalle, Ar-
jun Subramonian, Jeff Phillips, and Kai-Wei Chang.
2021. Harms of gender exclusivity and challenges in
non-binary representation in language technologies.
InProceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
1968–1994, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Lucas Dixon, John Li, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain,
and Lucy Vasserman. 2018. Measuring and Mitigat-
ing Unintended Bias in Text Classiﬁcation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
Ethics, and Society , pages 67–73, New Orleans LA
USA. ACM.
Jesse Dodge, Taylor Prewitt, Remi Tachet des Combes,
Erika Odmark, Roy Schwartz, Emma Strubell,
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Noah A. Smith, Nicole
DeCario, and Will Buchanan. 2022. Measuring the
Carbon Intensity of AI in Cloud Instances. In 2022
ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency , pages 1877–1894, Seoul Republic of
Korea. ACM.
Michel Foucault. 2013. Archaeology of Knowledge , 0
edition. Routledge.
Lisa Gitelman, editor. 2013. "Raw data" is an oxy-
moron . Infrastructures series. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts ; London, England.
Ben Green and Salomé Viljoen. 2020. Algorithmic
Realism: Expanding the Boundaries of Algorithmic
Thought. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAT*
’20, pages 19–31, New York, NY , USA. Association
for Computing Machinery. Event-place: Barcelona,
Spain.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski,
Bruna Morrone, Quentin de Laroussilhe, Andrea
Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly.
2019. Parameter-efﬁcient transfer learning for NLP.
InProceedings of the 36th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June
2019, Long Beach, California, USA , volume 97 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages
2790–2799. PMLR.Chia-Chien Hung, Anne Lauscher, Simone Ponzetto,
and Goran Glavaš. 2022. DS-TOD: Efﬁcient do-
main specialization for task-oriented dialog. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: ACL 2022 , pages 891–904, Dublin, Ireland. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings .
Anne Lauscher, Archie Crowley, and Dirk Hovy. 2022.
Welcome to the modern world of pronouns: Identity-
inclusive natural language processing beyond gen-
der. In Proceedings of the 29th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics , pages 1221–
1232, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea. International
Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Anne Lauscher, Goran Glavaš, Simone Paolo Ponzetto,
and Ivan Vuli ´c. 2020. A general framework for im-
plicit and explicit debiasing of distributional word
vector spaces. volume 34, pages 8131–8138. Associ-
ation for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AAAI).
Anne Lauscher, Tobias Lueken, and Goran Glavaš.
2021. Sustainable modular debiasing of language
models. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2021 , pages 4782–4797,
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretrain-
ing Approach. arXiv:1907.11692 [cs] . ArXiv:
1907.11692.
Sebastian McGaughey. 2020. Understanding neopro-
nouns. The Gay & Lesbian Review Worldwide ,
27(2):27–29.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Richard Socher. 2016. Pointer sentinel mixture mod-
els.
Ehm Hjorth Miltersen. 2016. Nounself pronouns:
3rd person personal pronouns as identity expression.
Journal of Language Works-Sprogvidenskabeligt
Studentertidsskrift , 1(1):37–62.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Aishwarya Kamath, Andreas Rücklé,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. 2021.
AdapterFusion: Non-destructive task composition
for transfer learning. In Proceedings of the 16th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume ,
pages 487–503, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Andreas Rücklé, Clifton Poth, Aish-
warya Kamath, Ivan Vuli ´c, Sebastian Ruder,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. 2020a.
AdapterHub: A framework for adapting transform-
ers. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations , pages 46–54, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Ivan Vuli ´c, Iryna Gurevych, and Se-
bastian Ruder. 2020b. MAD-X: An Adapter-Based
Framework for Multi-Task Cross-Lingual Transfer.
InProceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 7654–7673, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Rebecca Qian, Candace Ross, Jude Fernandes, Eric
Smith, Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. 2022.
Perturbation Augmentation for Fairer NLP. arXiv.
ArXiv:2205.12586 [cs].
Anna Rogers. 2021. Changing the World by Changing
the Data. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 2182–2194, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Beatrice Santorini. 1990. Part-of-speech tagging guide-
lines for the penn treebank project.
Irene Solaiman and Christy Dennison. 2021. Process
for Adapting Language Models to Society (PALMS)
with Values-Targeted Datasets. arXiv:2106.10328
[cs]. ArXiv: 2106.10328.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCal-
lum. 2019. Energy and Policy Considerations for
Deep Learning in NLP. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , pages 3645–3650, Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zeerak Talat, Smarika Lulz, Joachim Bingel, and Is-
abelle Augenstein. 2021. Disembodied Machine
Learning: On the Illusion of Objectivity in NLP.
ArXiv: 2101.11974.
Ivan Vuli ´c, Simon Baker, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Ulla
Petti, Ira Leviant, Kelly Wing, Olga Majewska, Eden
Bar, Matt Malone, Thierry Poibeau, Roi Reichart,
and Anna Korhonen. 2020. Multi-SimLex: A large-
scale evaluation of multilingual and crosslingual lex-
ical semantic similarity. Computational Linguistics ,
46(4):847–897.
Hayden White. 2005. Introduction: Historical Fiction,
Fictional History, and Historical Reality. Rethinking
History , 9(2-3):147–157.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2017. Men also like
shopping: Reducing gender bias ampliﬁcation using
corpus-level constraints. In Proceedings of the 2017
conference on empirical methods in natural lan-
guage processing , pages 2979–2989, Copenhagen,
Denmark. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018. Gender Bias in
Coreference Resolution: Evaluation and Debiasing
Methods. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 15–20,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.