Title: Rainier: Reinforced Knowledge Introspector for Commonsense Question Answering

RAINIER : Reinforced Knowledge Introspector
for Commonsense Question Answering
Jiacheng Liu~Skyler Hallinan~Ximing Lu~Pengfei He~
Sean Welleck~Hannaneh Hajishirzi~Yejin Choi~
~Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
liujc@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
Knowledge underpins reasoning. Recent re-
search demonstrates that when relevant knowl-
edge is provided as additional context to com-
monsense question answering (QA), it can sub-
stantially enhance the performance even on top
of state-of-the-art. The fundamental challenge
is where and how to ﬁnd such knowledge that
is high quality and on point with respect to
the question; knowledge retrieved from knowl-
edge bases are incomplete and knowledge gen-
erated from language models are inconsistent.
We present R AINIER1, or Reinforced Knowl-
edge Introspector , that learns to generate con-
textually relevant knowledge in response to
given questions. Our approach starts by im-
itating knowledge generated by GPT-3, then
learns to generate its own knowledge via rein-
forcement learning where rewards are shaped
based on the increased performance on the re-
sulting question answering. R AINIER demon-
strates substantial and consistent performance
gains when tested over 9 different common-
sense benchmarks: including 5 datasets that
are seen during model training, as well as 4
datasets that are kept unseen. Our work is
the ﬁrst to report that knowledge generated by
models that are orders of magnitude smaller
than GPT-3, even without direct supervision
on the knowledge itself, can exceed the qual-
ity of commonsense knowledge elicited from
GPT-3.
1 Introduction
Commonsense is a signiﬁcant challenge for mod-
ern NLP models, due to the obscurity of underly-
ing knowledge that grounds the reasoning process.
While humans are generally able to introspect the
underlying reasons for their conclusion (Mercier
and Sperber, 2017), neural models lack the capabil-
ity to verbalize the premises leading to their predic-
1Code, model and knowledge-extended datasets are avail-
able at http://github.com/liujch1998/rainier
Figure 1: R AINIER can introspect for commonsense
knowledge that underpin the reasoning process, and is
trained via reinforcement learning, where the reward
is derived from the effectiveness of knowledge when
prompting a frozen, generic QA model.
tion. This hinders models’ performance and robust-
ness on commonsense tasks, and makes it difﬁcult
to inspect their point of failure. Recent research
has demonstrated that relevant knowledge can pro-
vide useful context for approaching commonsense
tasks. Yet these methods either retrieve from in-
domain knowledge bases (Mitra et al., 2019; Chang
et al., 2020) that do not have good coverage over
commonsense, or generate knowledge from neu-
ral models (Shwartz et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2022), which often need domain-speciﬁc
engineering and very large models (e.g. GPT-3
(Brown et al., 2020)). It is still an open challenge
to systematically ﬁnd high-quality knowledge.
In this work, we use a novel, reinforcement-
learning-based method to develop RAINIER , a gen-
erative neural model that can introspect the un-
derlying knowledge for reasoning about common-
sense questions. As illustrated in Fig 1, RAINIER is
trained to generate knowledge that are both ﬂuent
natural language statements, and useful prompts
that optimize the performance of a generic ques-
tion answering (QA) model. Our model (1) demon-
strates strong generalization to unseen benchmarksarXiv:2210.03078v2  [cs.CL]  22 Oct 2022
without additional engineering effort (e.g. ﬁne-
tuning), (2) produces commonsense knowledge of
high quality and diversity, and (3) is substantially
smaller in size compared to GPT-3, the best knowl-
edge source reported so far.
To train RAINIER , we optimize knowledge intro-
spection for the resulting QA, instead of direct su-
pervision, because there are usually no gold knowl-
edge labels on commonsense datasets. In order
to ensure that our model learns to generate gener-
ically useful knowledge for a broad range of QA
models, we train only RAINIER , the knowledge in-
trospector, without ﬁnetuning the QA model. Since
our desired knowledge are sequences of discrete,
non-differentiable word tokens, we adapt a rein-
forcement learning algorithm, Proximal Policy Op-
timization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017; Ouyang
et al., 2022), to optimize the knowledge introspec-
tor. Speciﬁcally, the reward is deﬁned as the ef-
fect of RAINIER -generated knowledge on the QA
model’s prediction. We train RAINIER in a multi-
task setting on 8 commonsense QA datasets – en-
compassing general, scientiﬁc, physical, and social
commonsense – to equip the model with better gen-
eralization to unseen benchmarks.
Experiments show that RAINIER substantially
improves the performance of QA models on 9 com-
monsense benchmarks (5 datasets seen during train-
ing and 4 unseen datasets), and gives larger and
more consistent gains than a few-shot GPT-3 (Liu
et al., 2022) despite being 16x smaller in parameter
size. It also boosts the performance on top of those
QA models that it is not trained against, indicat-
ing that it generates generically useful knowledge
instead of merely hacking into the reward given
by a single QA model. Knowledge generated by
RAINIER can even boost a QA model that is 4x
larger than it, showing the promise of using model-
generated knowledge as a complement to model
scaling in making progress in commonsense rea-
soning. Our analyses show that the knowledge
generated by RAINIER are of high quality, and are
diverse in terms of domain (e.g. scientiﬁc, social),
relation expressed (e.g. part of, member of, pur-
pose), and syntactic property (e.g. negation, com-
parison). The effect of these knowledge on the QA
model also aligns well with human judgments. The
success of RAINIER shows that moderately-sized
models can serve as source of high-quality and
useful commonsense knowledge that facilitates rea-
soning. We publicly release the code, the trainedAlgorithm 1 Training R AINIER
Input initial policy model 0, initial value model 0, pre-
trained QA model  QA
Dimit Get silver knowledge on Dseenfrom GPT-3.
imit Optimize0with Eqn 2 fromDimit..Section 2.1
RAINIER REINFORCED LEARNING (Dseen,imit,0, QA)
.Section 2.2
procedure REINFORCED LEARNING (Dseen,,, QA)
old ,old 
foriterations = 1, 2, . . . do
Sample a minibatch from Dseen.
forstep = 1, 2, . . . , sdo
ComputeLPPOon the minibatch with Eqn 3.
OptimizeandwithLPPOfor one step.
old ,old 
return
OutputRAINIER
RAINIER model, and the commonsense datasets
extended with knowledge generated by RAINIER .
2 Method
Problem Overview. We focus on the tasks of
multiple-choice commonsense QA, consisting of
instances of format x= (q;A;a), whereqis the
question,Ais the set of candidate answers, and
a2Ais the correct answer. For full contextu-
alization, we append candidate answers Ato the
questionqto form the input to the QA model as
follows:
q={question} (A) {choice_A} (B) {choice_B} ...
Common approaches only train supervised QA
models. As a complement, we train a separate
model, which we refer to as RAINIER , that can
introspect question-speciﬁc knowledges that are
useful to prompt a ﬁxed QA model. RAINIER is a
sequence-to-sequence language model, pK(kjq;),
and we expect it to generate knowledge statements
(k’s) in response to the given question ( q). How-
ever, the challenge is that we have no gold knowl-
edge labels as supervision.
Training. Since we do not have gold knowledge
to train RAINIER , we obtain this model by ﬁne-
tuning a pretrained language model in two stages:
(I) imitation learning, and then (II) reinforcement
learning. In Stage I (§2.1), we get silver knowledge
labels on some datasets from GPT-3, and teach our
model to imitate this knowledge-generating GPT-3.
This equips our model with the basic functionality
of knowledge generation. In Stage II (§2.2), we
use reinforcement learning to continue training the
model obtained in Stage I to make the generated
knowledge more useful while staying ﬂuent and
meaningful. Specially, we set the reward to be the
effect of the generated knowledge on the prediction
made by a ﬁxed, generic QA model. We obtain sil-
ver knowledge and train RAINIER on the union of
multiple QA datasets (which are considered seen
during training), i.e. Dseen=Sseen
d=1Dd, where
Dd=f(qj;Aj;a
j)gjDdj
j=1. The generic QA model
we use may or may not have been trained on these
seen datasets. The complete training process is
outlined in Algorithm 1.
Inference. The effectiveness of RAINIER is eval-
uated against a set of unseen QA datasets,Dunseen ,
in addition to the seen datasets. Note that RAINIER
is not trained on any unseen datasets, which means
we neither get silver knowledge, nor do imitation
learning or reinforcement learning on them. The
generic QA model we use was not trained on any
unseen datasets as well. We discuss details of infer-
ence in §2.3.
2.1 Training Stage I: Imitation Learning
In Stage I, we train RAINIER so that it generates
ﬂuent and meaningful natural language statements
that resemble knowledge. There is no large-scale
commonsense QA dataset labeled with high-quality
knowledge, but GPT-3 has been shown as a good
generator for relevant knowledge (Liu et al., 2022).
Therefore, we get silver knowledge from GPT-3
on our seen datasets. Following Liu et al. (2022),
we elicit question-related knowledge by prompting
GPT-3 with a task-speciﬁc set of few-shot demon-
strations (See §C for details on the prompts), and
decodingMknowledge for each question:
K(q) =
km:kmpG(kjprompt (task(q));q)	
;
wherepG(j)denotes GPT-3 with nucleus sam-
pling where p= 0:5(Holtzman et al., 2020). This
yields a silver dataset of question-knowledge pairs:
Dimit=n
(q;k) : (q;A;a)2D seen;k2K(q)o
;
(1)
We then train RAINIER , starting from a pre-
trained sequence-to-sequence language model, on
this silver dataset with standard supervised loss:
Ltrain()/X
(q;k)2Dtrain
imit logpK(kjq;): (2)
The parameterization of the resulting model is de-
noted asimit.2.2 Training Stage II: Reinforcement
Learning
As we will see in the empirical results, the imitation
model obtained in Stage I does not provide the
most beneﬁcial knowledge. Therefore, in Stage
II, we continue optimizing RAINIER to generate
knowledge that best prompts the QA model, by
directly maximizing the reward given by this QA
model.
Knowledge generation as reinforcement learn-
ing. Since knowledge statements ( k’s) are dis-
crete and thus non-differentiable, we adopt a rein-
forcement learning approach, and consider knowl-
edge generation as a sequential decision making
process over the natural language vocabulary space.
We consider the generation of knowledge statement
kwithTtokens as an episode of length T. At step
t2[1;T], the statest= (q;k<t)is the combina-
tion of the question and the knowledge decoded up
to the (t 1)-th token; the action at=ktwould
be thet-th token to decode. The RAINIER model,
pK(ktjq;k<t;), is the policy model that we op-
timize. We deﬁne a reward function r(x;k)that
characterizes the effect of the knowledge on the
QA model’s prediction, and discuss the deﬁnition
of this reward function in §2.2.1.
To ensure that the generated knowledge stay ﬂu-
ent and meaningful, we would like the learned pol-
icy model not to move too far from the initial im-
itation model. Therefore, we add to the reward
an (approximate) KL penalty between the learned
policy and the initial policy (Ouyang et al., 2022),
R(x;k) =r(x;k) logpK(kjq;)
pK(kjq;imit):
Since this reward is computed based on the full
knowledge statement, we assign it to the last step
of the episode. Non-terminal steps are assigned
zero rewards. Formally,
rT=R(x;k) (whereT=jkjandkT=[EOS] );
rt= 0 ( where 1t<T ):
We employ Proximal Policy Optimization2
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) as our reinforcement
learning algorithm, and adapt from the implemen-
tation of PPO in Ouyang et al. (2022). Aside from
2We choose PPO because it has shown successful results
in other NLP tasks (Nakano et al., 2021; Stiennon et al.,
2020). Our earlier experiments with REINFORCE did not
show promising results.
the policy model, PPO additionally uses a value
model (parameterized by ) to estimate the value
function for states with incomplete decoded text,
i.e.V(st;)for anyt. PPO minimizes a joint loss,
LPPO(;) =LPolicy() +LValue();(3)
whereLPolicy()is the loss on the policy model,
LValue()is the loss on the value model, and is a
hyperparameter.
Policy loss. To obtain the policy loss, we ﬁrst
compute the truncated estimated advantage func-
tion,
^At=T 1X
t0=t()t0 tt0;
wheret0=rt0+V(st0+1;) V(st0;);
where the value functions V()are estimated by
the value model. PPO then maximizes the empir-
ical expectation of a so-called clipped surrogate
objective term,
cso(^At;t();") =
min 
t()^At;clip(t();1 ";1 +")^At
;
wheret() =pK(ktjq;)
pK(ktjq;old)is the ratio between the
current policy and a lagging policy old. The lag-
ging policy is updated to the current policy under a
ﬁxed interval of straining steps, and is kept ﬁxed
otherwise. We adapt this to our use case, and deﬁne
the policy loss as
LPolicy() = ^Eh
cso(^At;t();")i
where the expectation is taken over all instances
in the training data ( xDtrain
seen), the distribution
of model-generated knowledge as determined by
the current policy conditioning on the instance’s
question (kpK(kjq;)), and all tokens in the
knowledge statement ( t2[1;jkj]).
Value loss. The value model is trained with MSE
loss with respect to the target value, Vtarg
t, which in
turn is estimated with a lagging value model old:
LValue() =^Eh 
V(st;) Vtarg
t2i
;
whereVtarg
t=T 1X
t0=tt0 trt0+T tV(sT;old):2.2.1 Reward Shaping
We deﬁne the reward function in reinforcement
learning as the quantiﬁed effect of RAINIER ’s
knowledge on the QA model’s prediction. Sup-
pose we already have a reasonably good QA model,
which assigns a probability score PQA(ajq)to any
candidate answer a2A. Since we will use a
sequence-to-sequence language model (i.e. Uni-
ﬁedQA (Khashabi et al., 2020)) as the QA model,
we deﬁne
PQA(ajq) =expSQA(ajq)P
a02AexpSQA(a0jq);
where
SQA(ajq) =1
jajjajX
i=1 logpQA(aijq;a<i; QA);
wherepQA(aijq;a<i; QA)is the language model-
ing score received by ai, thei-th token of a. The
naive prediction would be the candidate answer
that gets the highest PQA(ajq)(or equivalently, the
highestSQA(ajq)):^a= arg maxa2APQA(ajq).
We aim at maximizing PQA(ajqk), the prob-
ability score received by the correct answer when
the QA model is prompted with the knowledge k
generated by RAINIER , anddenotes text concate-
nation. One naive deﬁnition of reward function
may be
r(x;k) =PQA(ajqk) PQA(ajq):
However, this reward only captures the absolute
change of score, but not whether the model pre-
diction is changed or not. To remedy for this, we
deﬁne the reward function as
r(x;k) =1
2h
tanh 
SQA(ajqk) max
a02A;
a06=aSQA(a0jqk)
 tanh 
SQA(ajq) max
a02A;
a06=aSQA(a0jq)i
:
Intuitively, this function would give a reward of
near +1if the naive prediction is incorrect (i.e.
SQA(ajq)<maxa02A;a06=aSQA(a0jq)), while
the knowledge-prompted prediction is correct (i.e.
SQA(ajqk)>maxa02A;a06=aSQA(a0jqk)).
Similarly, the reward would be near  1if the naive
prediction is correct but the knowledge-prompted
prediction is incorrect. The hyperbolic tangent
serves as a smoothed sign function, and provides
a soft interpolation between the two polarity of re-
ward values by taking into account the margin of
the correct answer.
We also experiment with some alternative deﬁni-
tions of the reward function. See Table 4.
Reward normalization. To stabilize training,
we apply an afﬁne transformation on the rewards
so that initially they are normalized. Before start-
ing Stage II training, we use the imitation model
to generate a knowledge statement for each train-
ing instance, and estimate the population mean and
standard deviation of rewards:
Rinit=
r(x;k) :x2Dtrain
seen;kpK(jq;imit)	
;
0=(Rinit);0=(Rinit): (4)
In Stage II training, each reward is normalized as:
r(x;k) r(x;k) 0
0: (5)
2.3 Inference: Knowledge Prompting and
Aggregation
Following Liu et al. (2022), at inference time we
useRAINIER to generate multiple knowledge per
question, and prompt the QA model by individually
concatenating each knowledge to the question. The
knowledge are generated by RAINIER with nucleus
sampling where p= 0:5(Holtzman et al., 2020),
K(q) =f"g[
km:kmpp=0:5
K(kjq;);
m= 1:::M	
;
whereMis the number of knowledge per question,
and"denotes empty string. We collect a set of out-
puts for prompting with each knowledge. The ﬁnal
prediction is the candidate answer that receives
maximum conﬁdence,
^a= arg max
a2Amax
k2K(q)PQA(ajqk);
and the prediction is supported by a single knowl-
edge – the selected knowledge ,
^k= arg max
k2K(q)max
a2APQA(ajqk):
Training time model selection. In Stage II train-
ing, we only generate one knowledge per question
for the validation set.3Predictions are made using
the same knowledge prompting method as above,
and the model checkpoint with the maximal accu-
racy on the union of all validation sets is selected.
3This is for efﬁciency purposes. We use greedy decoding
here because it is more stable than nucleus sampling when
generating only one knowledge per question.3 Experiments
Seen datasets. For both imitation learning and
reinforcement learning, we use the 8 multiple-
choice datasets that UniﬁedQAv2(Khashabi et al.,
2022) uses for training: OpenBookQA (Mihaylov
et al., 2018), ARC (Clark et al., 2018), AI2Science
(Clark et al., 2018), CommonsenseQA (Talmor
et al., 2019), QASC (Khot et al., 2020), Physi-
calIQA (Bisk et al., 2020), SocialIQA (Sap et al.,
2019), and Winogrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2021).4
Unseen datasets. We additionally evaluate our
method on the following 4 multiple-choice QA
datasets that our model was nottrained on: Nu-
merSense (Lin et al., 2020), RiddleSense (Lin et al.,
2021), QuaRTz (Tafjord et al., 2019), and Hel-
laSwag (Zellers et al., 2019).
Models. For Stage I training, we get silver knowl-
edge from the GPT-3-Curie (13B) model (Brown
et al., 2020). The knowledge introspector is ini-
tialized with T5-large (Raffel et al., 2019), which
has 0.77B parameters. For Stage II training, we
initialize the value model with T5-large, and re-
place the language modeling head with a value
regression head, which is initialized from scratch;
we use UniﬁedQA-large (UQA-large) (Khashabi
et al., 2020) as the QA model that provides reward,
which means the text concatenation function is de-
ﬁned asqk={q} \n {k} . We use the same
question formatting as UniﬁedQA. See Table 7 for
hyperparameters.
Baselines. We mainly report performance im-
provements over the vanilla QA baseline (i.e. di-
rect inference with the UniﬁedQA-large model
and without prompting RAINIER -generated knowl-
edge). We also consider using knowledge from:
•Few-shot GPT-3 (Liu et al., 2022), where
knowledge statements are elicited from the
GPT-3-Curie (13B) model – under the same
prompts used for getting silver knowledge
in Stage I training (§2.1), and the same hy-
perparameter setting for decoding ( M= 10
knowledge per question, with nucleus sam-
pling where p= 0:5).
•Self-talk (Shwartz et al., 2020), where we gen-
erateM= 10 knowledge per question with
GPT-3-Curie and a variety of templates.
4We exclude MCTest and RACE because most questions
in these reading comprehension datasets are too long to ﬁt into
our model’s input.
Dataset! CSQA QASC PIQA SIQA WG Avg.
Method# dev test dev test dev test dev test dev test dev test
UQA-large (0.77B) 61.43 53.00 43.09 45.65 63.66 65.50 53.84 57.21 53.35 54.67 55.07 55.21
+ Few-shot GPT-3-Curie (13B) 66.34 – 53.24 – 64.25 – 58.29 – 55.56 – 59.54 –
+ Self-talk GPT-3-Curie (13B) 63.31 – 49.89 – 65.23 – 51.89 – 52.96 – 56.66 –
+ DREAM (11B) 64.54 – 49.46 – 64.74 – 51.59 – 56.12 – 57.29 –
+ R AINIER -large (0.77B) [ours] 67.24 60.18 54.97 54.13 65.67 67.09 57.01 59.01 56.91 57.39 60.36 59.56
Table 1: Results on seen datasets. All experiments use UniﬁedQA-large as the QA model, and optionally uses
knowledge from one of the knowledge generation models. Skipped baselines are marked with “–”.
Dataset! NS RS QuaRTz HS Avg.
Method# dev test-all dev test dev test dev test dev test
UQA-large (0.77B) 26.50 19.61 28.11 38.34 68.75 67.60 35.00 34.30 39.59 41.85
+ Few-shot GPT-3-Curie (13B) 38.00 – 35.65 – 69.01 – 37.33 – 45.00 –
+ R AINIER -large (0.77B) [ours] 30.00 21.81 30.07 41.22 70.31 68.24 35.73 34.80 41.53 43.76
Table 2: Results on unseen datasets.
•DREAM (Gu et al., 2022), where we generate
M= 10 scene elaborations per question with
the DREAM (11B) model.
See §A.2 for more details on these baselines. We
do not compare with chain-of-thought prompting
(Wei et al., 2022) because it relies on emergent
behaviors that does not exist in the scale that we
experiment with.
4 Results
4.1 Main Results
Performance on seen datasets. Table 1 shows
the performance of RAINIER -enhanced QA model
on the seen datasets. On average, our method
achieves more than 5% improvement over directly
applying the QA model. The knowledge gener-
ated by RAINIER improves performance on ﬁve
benchmarks: CommonsenseQA, QASC, Physi-
calIQA, SocialIQA, and Winogrande, with the
greatest improvement on CommonsenseQA (+6%)
and QASC (+12%). As shown in Table 8, there is
no performance gain on OpenBookQA, ARC, and
AI2Science. We conjecture that this is because the
QA model, UniﬁedQA, is already trained on these
three datasets, thus setting a strong baseline.
Comparison with other models. Compared to
RAINIER , other knowledge generation models, in-
cluding few-shot GPT-3, Self-talk, and DREAM,
provide generally weaker improvements over the
vanilla QA baseline. In particular, RAINIER out-
performs GPT-3-based models while being 16x
smaller in parameter size (0.77B vs. 13B).Performance on unseen datasets. Table 2
shows that RAINIER ’s knowledge substantially im-
proves performance over the vanilla QA baseline
on the four unseen datasets, demonstrating its gen-
eralization capability.
Choice of QA model for evaluation. To verify
that our RAINIER model is not hacking into the
rewards provided by the QA model we use dur-
ing training, we evaluate the effect of RAINIER ’s
knowledge on different QA models. We choose
three other UniﬁedQA models with different sizes,
as well as a different model known as Unicorn
(Lourie et al., 2021). Results are shown in Fig-
ure 2. RAINIER consistently gives performance
gains on top of all QA models, indicating that its
knowledge are generally useful information rather
than mere artifacts of model-speciﬁc reward hack-
ing. We even observe performance gains with a
QA model that is 4x as large as RAINIER , which
means generating and prompting relevant knowl-
edge can be a technique complementary to model
scaling, and can be done meaningfully with smaller
models. Finally, we see the largest improvement
when the QA model itself has weak, but non-trivial,
performance (UniﬁedQA-small for seen datasets,
and UniﬁedQA-base for unseen datasets).
4.2 Ablations
Stage I and Stage II training. We experimented
with omitting the Stage I (imitation) and/or Stage II
(reinforcement) from the training pipeline. Results
are shown in Table 3. Without Stage I training,
Figure 2: Effectiveness of R AINIER -generated knowledge on different QA models. Average accuracy on dev sets
is reported. (Note: results of few-shot GPT-3-Curie on Unicorn-large is missing.)
QA Model! UQA-large
Knowledge Gen.# seen unseen
None 55.07 39.59
RAINIER -large 60.36 41.53
– Stage I 53.68 36.83
– Stage II 57.00 40.70
– Stage I – Stage II 53.29 36.72
Table 3: Ablations on the impor-
tance of both training stages.QA Model! UQA-large
Reward Func.#Deﬁnition:r(x;k) =::: seen unseen
RAINIER ’s1
2h
tanh 
SQA(ajqk) maxa02A;a06=aSQA(a0jqk)
 tanh 
SQA(ajq) maxa02A;a06=aSQA(a0jq)i
60.36 41.53
Prob only PQA(ajqk) 59.11 40.61
Prob diff PQA(ajqk) PQA(ajq) 60.69 40.91
Score diff SQA(ajqk) SQA(ajq) 58.26 39.86
Hard activation1
2h
sgn 
SQA(ajqk) maxa02A;a06=aSQA(a0jqk)
 sgn 
SQA(ajq) maxa02A;a06=aSQA(a0jq)i
58.32 41.16
Table 4: Ablations on the choice of reward function.
RAINIER does not improve the performance of the
QA model (regardless of whether it is trained with
Stage II or not), showing the indispensability of
equipping the model with the basic functionality of
knowledge generation. On the other hand, a model
trained solely with Stage I gives weaker improve-
ments than the fully trained RAINIER , stressing the
importance of Stage II training as well.
Reward function. Table 4 shows the results for
knowledge introspectors trained with different re-
ward functions. Our reward shaping gives the best
performance on unseen datasets, as well as one of
the top performance on seen datasets. While the
naive prob diff reward function gives slightly better
performance on seen datasets, our reward shaping
results in better generalization.
4.3 Analysis
To get a deeper understanding of the behavior and
capability of RAINIER , we manually analyzed the
generated knowledge along several quality anddi-
versity aspects. We asked three NLP experts to
annotate the selected knowledge (§2.3) for up to
100 questions per dataset among the validation sets
of 8 benchmarks (5 seen, 3 unseen; see Figure 3). It
was hidden from the annotators whether the knowl-
edge rectiﬁes or misleads QA model’s prediction,so potential bias is eliminated.
Quality. First, we follow Liu et al. (2022) by an-
notating the quality aspects – relevance ,factuality ,
andhelpfulness – of each knowledge with respect
to the question. We ﬁnd that RAINIER -generated
knowledge are overwhelmingly related to the re-
spective questions. 64% are factually correct, 25%
are factually incorrect, and the remaining 11% have
undetermined factuality due to various reasons (e.g.
ambiguity, cultural sensitivity). 58% are seen by
human as being helpful for reasoning about the
question, whereas 24% are seen as harmful.
In our annotations, there are 420 knowledge that
rectify UniﬁedQA-large’s predictions (i.e. ﬂipping
from wrong to right), and 246 knowledge that mis-
lead the predictions (i.e. ﬂipping from right to
wrong). Among the rectifying knowledge, 84% are
deemed helpful by human; and among the mislead-
ing knowledge, 62% are deemed harmful. These
results have similar trends as Liu et al. (2022), and
show that RAINIER ’s knowledge are of high quality
and interpretability in helping QA models.
Diversity. Additionally, we analyze the diversity
aspects by annotating each knowledge with the do-
main (s) it belongs to (e.g. scientiﬁc, social), the
relation (s) it expresses (e.g. attribute, capable of),
Figure 3: Human analysis of R AINIER -generated knowledge. Left: Percentage of good knowledge in each quality
aspect. Mid: Agreement between human and machine on helpfulness of selected knowledge .Right: Percentage
of R AINIER -generated knowledge categorized by domain, expressed relation, and syntax. The percentages do not
add up to 100% because some knowledge have none of these characteristics, while some others may have multiple.
and its syntactic property(s) (e.g. negation, com-
parison). See Figure 3 for complete list of options
under each aspect. The knowledge’s domain distri-
bution is strongly tied to the domain of the bench-
mark (e.g. scientiﬁc for QASC and QuaRTz, social
for SocialIQA and Winogrande, numerical for Nu-
merSense). The domain aspect is more diverse for
benchmarks that test general commonsense, like
CommonsenseQA and RiddleSense. For the rela-
tion aspect, there are many knowledge that express
an “attribute” relation, while other relations are also
substantially represented. As for syntax, a good
proportion of the knowledge contain structures like
comparison and negation. Therefore, RAINIER ’s
knowledge have good syntactic and semantic diver-
sity while being able to adapt to the domain.
4.4 Qualitative Examples
We show some examples of good knowledge gen-
erated by R AINIER in Table 5.
5 Related Work
Explicit reasoning for commonsense QA.
Commonsense question answering poses a
signiﬁcant challenge to modern neural models. To
improve performance and interpretability, many
work have proposed to do explicit reasoning
for tasks in this area, that is, to verbalize the
intermediate text artifacts that facilitate the rea-
soning process. Rajani et al. (2019) and Latcinnik
and Berant (2020) use supervised learning to
train models to generate text explanations, while
Gu et al. (2022) and Bansal et al. (2021) use
similar training regimes to obtain models that can
generate scene elaborations and paths through a
structured knowledge graph, respectively. Shwartzet al. (2020) and Paranjape et al. (2021) prompt
pretrained models with pre-deﬁned templates to
generate question clariﬁcations or contrastive
explanations, which are in turn used to prompt the
inference model. The above approaches all pose,
implicitly or explicitly, certain constraints (e.g.
domain, relation, syntax) on the model-generated
text. In contrast, Wei et al. (2022) elicits full
chain-of-reasoning from language models with
in-context learning; Liu et al. (2022) uses few-shot
demonstrations to elicit ﬂexible, relevant knowl-
edge statements from a language model, and Wang
et al. (2022) distills this capability into smaller
models using supervised learning. These methods
provide more ﬂexibility on the knowledge, yet they
rely on accessing very large language models (e.g.
GPT-3). Aside from methods that make reasoning
explicit in a linear chain manner, another set of
work produce recursive structures of reasoning,
through either backward chaining (Dalvi et al.,
2022; Jung et al., 2022) or forward chaining
(Bostrom et al., 2022). Our work contributes to
this line of research, yet we depart from prior
work by presenting the ﬁrst approach that learns
to generate relevant knowledge without requiring
human-labeled gold knowledge.
Reinforcement learning for NLP. Recently, re-
inforcement learning methods have been adopted
for NLP tasks like question answering (Nakano
et al., 2021), summarization (Stiennon et al., 2020;
Paulus et al., 2018), machine translation (Shen
et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016), grounded text gener-
ation (Ammanabrolu et al., 2021, 2022), controlled
text generation (Lu et al., 2022), and prompt gen-
eration (Guo et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2022). Our
application of reinforcement learning on knowl-
Task Question / Knowledge Domain Relation Syntax
CSQAWhat would vinyl be an odd thing to replace? (A) pants (B) record albums (C)
record store (D) cheese (E) wallpaper
Vinyl is a type of plastic. scientiﬁc member of –
QASCSome pelycosaurs gave rise to reptile ancestral to (A) lamphreys (B) angiosperm
(C) mammals (D) paramecium (E) animals (F) protozoa (G) arachnids (H)
backbones scientiﬁc
Reptiles are the ancestors of all mammals. temporal attribute –
SIQASydney rubbed Addison’s head because she had a horrible headache. What will
happen to Sydney? (A) drift to sleep (B) receive thanks (C) be reprimanded
A good deed will be rewarded. social – –
WGAdam always spent all of the free time watching Tv unlike Hunter who volun-
teered, due to _ being lazy. (A) Adam (B) Hunter
Hunter is more active than Adam. social attribute comparison
RSCauses bad breath and frightens blood-suckers (A) tuna (B) iron (C) trash (D)
garlic (E) pubs
Garlic is a strong-smelling food. – attribute –
QuaRTzIf the mass of an object gets bigger what will happen to the amount of matter
contained within it? (A) gets bigger (B) gets smaller scientiﬁc
The mass of an object is proportional to the amount of matter it con-
tains.physical – –
Table 5: Examples of good knowledge generated by R AINIER . Each of these knowledge rectiﬁes UniﬁedQA-
large’s prediction, and is labeled by the annotator as relevant, factual, and helpful.
edge introspection is novel. The idea of reinforce-
ment learning with model-provided feedback has
been previously explored in Guo et al. (2021), Am-
manabrolu et al. (2021), and Lu et al. (2022). The
PPO algorithm has been previously employed to
optimize rewards learned from human feedback
(Nakano et al., 2021; Stiennon et al., 2020). In
contrast, we use PPO to optimize reward purely
derived from the decision-making neural models.
6 Conclusion
We introduced RAINIER , a neural model that can in-
trospect for relevant knowledge on a broad range of
commonsense question answering tasks. RAINIER
is trained with a novel adaption of reinforcement
learning, and does not need gold knowledge labels
that are difﬁcult to obtain. Knowledge generated by
RAINIER can serve as useful prompts that improves
the performance of QA models on both seen and
unseen benchmarks, and outperform knowledge
elicited from a few-shot GPT-3 which is 16x bigger.
RAINIER generates knowledge in the form of natu-
ral language statements that are ﬂuent, meaningful,
high-quality, and diverse in terms of domain and
relation; furthermore, the effect of these knowledge
on the QA model is found to align well with human
judgments.Limitations
Despite the positive effect of our knowledge intro-
spector RAINIER on commonsense QA tasks, its
performance on non-commonsense applications is
unknown and thus requires further investigation.
Even for commonsense applications, there is still a
large gap between model performance and human
performance, so the resulting model is not ready
for real-world applications. There is also a limit
on the length of knowledge it generates in our ex-
perimental setting, and it has not been tested on
generating long and coherent text. Furthermore,
in some cases it may generate knowledge that ex-
press inappropriate social values (Table 10), are
culture-speciﬁc (Table 11), or contain ethical risks
(Table 12). See §B for examples. Extra care should
be taken when applying our model in production
environments, especially when making critical de-
cisions or exposing its generated contents directly
to human end users.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by the DARPA MCS
program through NIWC Paciﬁc (N66001-19-2-
4031), NSF IIS-2044660, and ONR N00014-18-
1-2826. We thank OpenAI for offering access to
the GPT-3 API.
We would like to thank Prithviraj Ammanabrolu,
Alisa Liu and Weijia Shi for the discussion and
feedback on early drafts of the paper. We also
thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable
feedback.
References
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Liwei Jiang, Maarten Sap,
Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. 2022. Align-
ing to social norms and values in interactive narra-
tives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01975 .
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Jack Urbanek, Margaret Li,
Arthur Szlam, Tim Rocktäschel, and Jason Weston.
2021. How to motivate your dragon: Teaching goal-
driven agents to speak and act in fantasy worlds. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,
pages 807–833, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Rachit Bansal, Milan Aggarwal, Sumit Bhatia, Ji-
vat Neet Kaur, and Balaji Krishnamurthy. 2021.
Cose-co: Text conditioned generative commonsense
contextualizer.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan LeBras, Jianfeng
Gao, and Yejin Choi. 2020. PIQA: reasoning about
physical commonsense in natural language. In The
Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Ap-
plications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI
2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New
York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020 , pages 7432–
7439. AAAI Press.
Kaj Bostrom, Zayne Sprague, Swarat Chaudhuri, and
Greg Durrett. 2022. Natural language deduction
through search over statement compositions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.06028 .
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen,
Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-
ers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, De-
cember 6-12, 2020, virtual .
Ting-Yun Chang, Yang Liu, Karthik Gopalakrishnan,
Behnam Hedayatnia, Pei Zhou, and Dilek Hakkani-
Tur. 2020. Incorporating commonsense knowledge
graph in pretrained models for social commonsense
tasks. In Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out(DeeLIO): The First Workshop on Knowledge Ex-
traction and Integration for Deep Learning Architec-
tures , pages 74–79, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot,
Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind
Tafjord. 2018. Think you have solved question an-
swering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.05457 .
Bhavana Dalvi, Oyvind Tafjord, and Peter Clark.
2022. Towards teachable reasoning systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.13074 .
Mingkai Deng, Jianyu Wang, Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Yihan
Wang, Han Guo, Tianmin Shu, Meng Song, Eric P
Xing, and Zhiting Hu. 2022. Rlprompt: Optimiz-
ing discrete text prompts with reinforcement learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12548 .
Yuling Gu, Bhavana Dalvi, and Peter Clark. 2022.
DREAM: Improving situational QA by ﬁrst elab-
orating the situation. In Proceedings of the 2022
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies , pages 1115–1127, Seattle,
United States. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Han Guo, Bowen Tan, Zhengzhong Liu, Eric P Xing,
and Zhiting Hu. 2021. Text generation with efﬁcient
(soft) q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.07704 .
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and
Yejin Choi. 2020. The curious case of neural text
degeneration. In 8th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenReview.net.
Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brah-
man, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, and
Yejin Choi. 2022. Maieutic prompting: Logi-
cally consistent reasoning with recursive explana-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11822 .
Daniel Khashabi, Yeganeh Kordi, and Hannaneh Ha-
jishirzi. 2022. Uniﬁedqa-v2: Stronger general-
ization via broader cross-format training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.12359 .
Daniel Khashabi, Sewon Min, Tushar Khot, Ashish
Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Han-
naneh Hajishirzi. 2020. UNIFIEDQA: Crossing for-
mat boundaries with a single QA system. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 1896–1907, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Tushar Khot, Peter Clark, Michal Guerquin, Peter
Jansen, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2020. QASC: A
dataset for question answering via sentence com-
position. In The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-
Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Conference, IAAI 2020, The Tenth AAAI Sym-
posium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA, February
7-12, 2020 , pages 8082–8090. AAAI Press.
Veronica Latcinnik and Jonathan Berant. 2020. Ex-
plaining question answering models through text
generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05569 .
Bill Yuchen Lin, Seyeon Lee, Rahul Khanna, and Xi-
ang Ren. 2020. Birds have four legs?! NumerSense:
Probing Numerical Commonsense Knowledge of
Pre-Trained Language Models. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6862–
6868, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Ziyi Wu, Yichi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee,
and Xiang Ren. 2021. RiddleSense: Reasoning
about riddle questions featuring linguistic creativ-
ity and commonsense knowledge. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-
IJCNLP 2021 , pages 1504–1515, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Jiacheng Liu, Alisa Liu, Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Pe-
ter West, Ronan Le Bras, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh
Hajishirzi. 2022. Generated knowledge prompting
for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the
60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
3154–3169, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Nicholas Lourie, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula,
and Yejin Choi. 2021. Unicorn on rainbow: A uni-
versal commonsense reasoning model on a new mul-
titask benchmark. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 35, pages
13480–13488.
Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Liwei Jiang, Jack Hessel,
Lianhui Qin, Peter West, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu,
and Yejin Choi. 2022. Quark: Controllable text gen-
eration with reinforced unlearning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.13636 .
Hugo Mercier and Dan Sperber. 2017. The enigma of
reason.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish
Sabharwal. 2018. Can a suit of armor conduct elec-
tricity? a new dataset for open book question an-
swering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 2381–2391, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Arindam Mitra, Pratyay Banerjee, Kuntal Kumar Pal,
Swaroop Mishra, and Chitta Baral. 2019. How ad-
ditional knowledge can improve natural language
commonsense question answering? arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.08855 .Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu,
Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse,
Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders,
et al. 2021. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-
answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.09332 .
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-
roll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
2022. Training language models to follow in-
structions with human feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.02155 .
Bhargavi Paranjape, Julian Michael, Marjan
Ghazvininejad, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2021. Prompting contrastive explana-
tions for commonsense reasoning tasks. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 4179–4192, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
2018. A deep reinforced model for abstractive sum-
marization. In 6th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference
Track Proceedings . OpenReview.net.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2019. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text trans-
former. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683 .
Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming
Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2019. Explain yourself!
leveraging language models for commonsense rea-
soning. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 4932–4942, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavat-
ula, and Yejin Choi. 2021. Winogrande: An adver-
sarial winograd schema challenge at scale. Commu-
nications of the ACM , 64(9):99–106.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan
Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. 2019. Social IQa: Com-
monsense reasoning about social interactions. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 4463–
4473, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec
Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proximal
policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347 .
Shiqi Shen, Yong Cheng, Zhongjun He, Wei He, Hua
Wu, Maosong Sun, and Yang Liu. 2016. Minimum
risk training for neural machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 1683–1692, Berlin, Germany. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Vered Shwartz, Peter West, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra
Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Unsupervised
commonsense question answering with self-talk. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 4615–4629, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel
Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea V oss, Alec Radford,
Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learn-
ing to summarize with human feedback. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:3008–
3021.
Oyvind Tafjord, Matt Gardner, Kevin Lin, and Peter
Clark. 2019. QuaRTz: An open-domain dataset of
qualitative relationship questions. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5941–5946, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and
Jonathan Berant. 2019. CommonsenseQA: A ques-
tion answering challenge targeting commonsense
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4149–4158, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Wenya Wang, Vivek Srikumar, Hanna Hajishirzi, and
Noah A Smith. 2022. Elaboration-generating com-
monsense question answering at scale. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2209.01232 .
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022.
Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903 .
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V
Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus
Macherey, et al. 2016. Google’s neural machine
translation system: Bridging the gap between hu-
man and machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08144 .
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali
Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2019. HellaSwag: Can
a machine really ﬁnish your sentence? In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4791–
4800, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
A Additional Experimental Details
A.1 Hyperparameters
See Table 7.
A.2 Baselines
Self-talk. We generate M= 10 knowledge
per question with GPT-3-Curie, using 10 pairs of
question-answer templates adapted from Shwartz
et al. (2020). We generate one knowledge from
each template: ﬁrst, query GPT-3 with the question
template and using nucleus sampling ( p= 0:2)
to obtain a full question; next, query GPT-3 again
with both the full question and the corresponding
answer template, this time using nucleus sampling
(p= 0:5), to obtain a full answer sentence. The
answer sentence will be treated as the knowledge.
DREAM. We generate M= 10 scene elabora-
tions per question with the DREAM (11B) model.
Gu et al. (2022) proposes 4 types of scene elabora-
tions: motivation ( M), emotion (E), rule-of-thumb
(ROT ), and consequence ( Con). Each is associ-
ated with a control code that guides the DREAM
model. We generate 2 or 3 scene elaborations for
each type, making a total of 10 per question.B Additional Analysis
Table 9 through 12 show more analysis of knowl-
edge generated by RAINIER . Table 9 shows seman-
tically problematic knowledge. Table 10 shows
knowledge that express some social value. Ta-
ble 11 shows knowledge that are culture-speciﬁc.
Table 12 shows knowledge that have potential ethi-
cal risks. All examples are taken from the valida-
tion set of the respective dataset.
C Prompts for Getting Silver Knowledge
from GPT-3
See Table 13 through 20.
Question Template Answer Template
What is the deﬁnition of The deﬁnition of _ is
What is the main purpose of The purpose of _ is to
What is the main function of a The main function of a _ is
What are the properties of a The properties of a _ are that
What is a _ is
What happened as a result of As a result of _,
What might have caused The cause of _ was
What is a part of A part of _ is
What is an example of An example of _ is
How would you One would _ by
Table 6: Templates used in the self-talk baseline.
Symbol Value Description
GETTING SILVER KNOWLEDGE FROM FEW-SHOT GPT-3
M 20 Number of knowledge statements to sample from GPT-3, per question.
p 0.5 Parameter for nucleus sampling from GPT-3.
Loutput 64 Max length of output from GPT-3.
STAGE I: IMITATION LEARNING
Linput 256 Max length of input to R AINIER (i.e. question plus choices).
Loutput 64 Max length of output from R AINIER (i.e. generated knowledge).
B 64 Batch size for training.
S 50,000 Total number of training steps.
 110 5Learning rate of Adam optimizer.
STAGE II: R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING
 1.0 Weight of value model loss in PPO.
 0.2 Weight of entropy bonus term in reward.
 1.0 Discount factor for rewards.
 0.95 Parameter for advantage estimation.
" 0.2 Clipping range for the clipped surrogate objective .
Linput 256 Max length of input to R AINIER (i.e. question plus choices).
Loutput 32 Max length of output from R AINIER (i.e. generated knowledge).
 0.7 Temperature for knowledge sampling in PPO training.
E 1M Total number of training episodes.
B 64 Batch size for training.
S 15,625 Total number of training steps.
s 4 Interval (in steps) for updating the lagging models (policy and value).
 210 5Learning rate of Adam optimizer (with a linear learning rate decay schedule).
INFERENCE
M 10 Number of knowledge statements to sample from R AINIER , per question.
p 0.5 Parameter for nucleus sampling from R AINIER .
Linput 256 Max length of input to R AINIER (i.e. question plus choices).
Loutput 32 Max length of output from R AINIER .
Table 7: Hyperparameter settings.
Dataset!OBQAARC AI2Science
Method# easy hard elem mid
UQA-large (0.77B) 70.20 69.12 55.85 69.11 64.80
+ Few-shot GPT-3-Curie (13B) 68.80 71.05 56.52 70.73 65.60
+ R AINIER -large (0.77B) [ours] 69.60 67.72 55.18 68.29 63.20
Table 8: Results on the other 3 seen datasets. All experiments use UniﬁedQA-large as the QA model, and optionally
uses knowledge from one of the knowledge generation models. On these datasets, R AINIER -generated knowledge
does not give an improvement over the vanilla QA baseline.
Task Question / Knowledge Problem with the knowledge
RS I am a fruit. I am tasty and provide lots of energy. You
can also ﬁnd me in a calendar. What am I?
(A) shop (B) choppers (C) date (D) european (E) movie
The fruit of the year is the date.Ambiguous
The knowledge does not specify which
year, so it is not possible to verify its
factuality.
QuaRTz Carla is pushing two carts down a street. One cart is
heavy, the other is light. The heavy cart, compared to the
light one, will accelerate
(A) slowly (B) quickly
The heavy cart will accelerate slower than the light
one.Under-speciﬁed
Missing the control factor that the
forces exerted on the carts are the same.
Though this ﬂaw also exists in the ques-
tion itself.
RS What has a head at night but not in the morning?
(A) sleeping (B) pillow (C) neck (D) shampoo (E) beer
Sleeping animals have a head at night.Over-speciﬁed
It would be normal to say "animals have
a head". It is weird to qualify with "sleep-
ing" and "at night".
WG Because William developed a sore knee during his race
against against Kyle, _ won the race.
(A) William (B) Kyle
William was not able to run the race.Over-conﬁdent
William might still be able to ﬁnish the
race with a sore knee.
RS what is the begining of enternity the end of life the end
of time and the end to every race
(A) e (B) quick (C) ﬁnality (D) ﬁx (E) habit
The end of every race is the end of every race.Tautological
This knowledge does not give any mean-
ingful information.
QuaRTz Sharon is conducting an experiment on valence electrons
and soon discovers that when they are closer to the nu-
cleus, they are _____ easily removed from the atom.
(A) more (B) less
Valence electrons are more prone to being removed
from the atom.Not applicable
This knowledge implicitly compares the
removability of valence vs. non-valence
electrons. However, the question needs a
comparison of valence electrons in atoms
of different sizes, so the knowledge can-
not be applied to answering this question.
Table 9: Examples of knowledge generated by R AINIER which are semantically problematic.
Task Question / Knowledge Problem with the knowledge
SIQA Riley broke loose from the house. He thought he would
never get out of there. Why did Riley do this?
(A) Stay in the house longer (B) think about his life (C)
go home for a while
Breaking out of a bad habit is usually a bad idea.Social value
This knowledge is a generally true state-
ment, so we labeled it as factual.
SIQA Tracy heard a faint buzzing noise and immediately ran
for her life. How would you describe Tracy?
(A) scared of bees (B) sad (C) not phased by bees
One should not be scared of bees.Social value
It is hard to decide whether this knowl-
edge should be considered factual or not.
SIQA Remy gave Skylar’s Netﬂix account password to one of
Remy’s other friends. How would Skylar feel as a result?
(A) like a bad friend (B) excited (C) used
A friend can be used by a friend.Social value
It is ambiguous whether canmeans it is
possible that ... , orought to . If it is the
latter, then the knowledge is promoting
some problematic social value.
SIQA Riley was the best of friends with the boy with cancer.
What will Riley want to do next?
(A) visit the hospital (B) shun the friend (C) become
friends with the boy with cancer too
One should visit their sick friend.Social value
It is generally a kind thing to visit a sick
friend. However, it is conceivable that
the friend needs to recover in peace or
has some infectious disease, which ren-
ders a visit inappropriate.
SIQA Carson tried to ﬁght Robin last night because Robin hurt
Carson a lot. What will Carson want to do next?
(A) apologize (B) do nothing (C) hurt Robin
One should apologize when they hurt someone.Social value
This knowledge is generally accepted.
However, there are extenuating circum-
stances where hurting someone does not
need an apology (e.g. hurting a violent
criminal to protect oneself).
SIQA Bailey told Alex to send the pdf because they didn’t want
to do it themselves. How would Alex feel as a result?
(A) lazy about work (B) happy (C) angry
One should be willing to help others.Social value
This knowledge is generally accepted,
but it is not a good ﬁt to the question’s
context. It is normal to be emotional
when being ordered to do something on
other’s behalf.
SIQA Kendall wrapped a bandage around my neck after getting
injured in a ﬁght. What will Kendall want to do next?
(A) harm them (B) punish them (C) protect them
One should help others in need.Social value
This knowledge is generally accepted,
and appropriate to the question’s context.
Table 10: Examples of knowledge generated by R AINIER that express some social value.
Task Question / Knowledge Problem with the knowledge
SIQA Remy made hay getting home from school on Friday the
13th. Why did Remy do this?
(A) go to school before this (B) had heard that on Friday
the 13th, God would bless you if you just went home and
hid (C) had heard that on Friday the 13th, that people
pranked other people really bad
People are more likely to be pranked on Friday the
13th.Culture-speciﬁc
This knowledge largely applies within
western, especially Christian, culture.
WG Lindsey like to read graphic novels but Natalie liked
classic literature to read. _ bought the new Frank Miller
comic at the book store.
(A) Lindsey (B) Natalie
Graphic novels are popular among teens.Culture-speciﬁc
This knowledge could be correct or not
depending on the culture or geographical
location.
CSQA Where would a person live that isn’t in the metro area
but still has good schools?
(A) woods (B) bed (C) suburbs (D) rural (E) neighbor-
hood
A person who lives in the suburbs is likely to have
good schools.Culture-speciﬁc
This knowledge could be correct or not
depending on the culture or geographical
location, and it is not even always true
within the U.S.
NS most people in the u.s. works <mask> consecutive hours
in a business day.
(A) no (B) one (C) two (D) three (E) four (F) ﬁve (G) six
(H) seven (I) eight (J) nine (K) ten
Most people work eight hours in a day.Culture-speciﬁc
This knowledge is an over-generalization.
In some other cultures, most people work
more then eight hours, or less.
CSQA What will god never do according to religion?
(A) anything (B) judge people (C) work miracles (D)
judge men (E) everywhere
God is a judge of people.Culture-speciﬁc
This is a topic speciﬁc to the religion.
Table 11: Examples of knowledge generated by R AINIER that are culture-speciﬁc.
Task Question / Knowledge Problem with the knowledge
RS A woman screams. You gointo a shop and ﬁnd a man
lying dead on the ﬂoor. There are three people in the
room. A postman, a milkman and a doctor. Who killed
him?
(A) doctor (B) police station (C) liars (D) radio (E) water
fountain
The doctor is the one who killed the man.Ethical risk
This knowledge might impress bias to-
wards a certain profession. However, the
question itself should probably take the
blame, because unfortunately, "doctor" is
the only valid choice given the question’s
context.
PIQA crossing out
(A) ugly people from the bachelor is cool (B) ugly people
from planet earth is cool
Crossing out ugly people from planet earth is cool.Ethical risk
This knowledge might impress bias to-
wards a group with certain physical char-
acteristic.
CSQA With the card slot lit up he knew how to get started
ﬁnding his balance with what?
(A) slot machine (B) ticket machine (C) bank machine
(D) telephone (E) automated teller
A slot machine is a machine that takes cards and uses
them to make money.Ethical risk
This knowledge might advocate for gam-
bling.
Table 12: Examples of knowledge generated by R AINIER that have potential ethical risks.
Task Prompt
OBQA Input: The sun is responsible for \n (A) puppies learning new tricks (B) children growing up and
getting old (C) ﬂowers wilting in a vase (D) plants sprouting, blooming and wilting
Knowledge: Natural light provides energy for photosynthesis.
Input: Poison causes harm to which of the following? \n (A) a Tree (B) a robot (C) a house (D) a
car
Knowledge: Living organisms are susceptible to poisonous matter.
Input: As a car approaches you in the night \n (A) the headlights become more intense (B) the
headlights recede into the dark (C) the headlights remain at a constant (D) the headlights turn off
Knowledge: The intensity of light increases when observed from a shorter distance.
Input: When the weather changes as it does from Christmas to Easter, \n (A) the air may chill
(B) the ground may freeze (C) the plants may die (D) the ground may warm
Knowledge: Christmas is in winter and Easter is in spring.
Input: Using mirrors to focus collected light from heavenly bodies allows \n (A) detailed
observation (B) foregone conclusions (C) radiation experiments (D) celestial music
Knowledge: Telescopes use mirrors to focus light from the stars.
Input: {question}
Knowledge:
Table 13: Prompt for OpenBookQA.
Task Prompt
ARC Input: George wants to warm his hands quickly by rubbing them. Which skin surface will
produce the most heat? \n (A) dry palms (B) wet palms (C) palms covered with oil (D) palms
covered with lotion
Knowledge: Rubbing hands produces heat because of friction.
Input: Which of the following is an example of a physical change? \n (A) lighting a match (B)
breaking a glass (C) burning of gasoline (D) rusting of iron
Knowledge: Physical changes must not involve chemical changes such as combustion and
rusting.
Input: On Earth, water can be a solid, a liquid, or a gas. Which energy source has the greatest
inﬂuence on the state of matter of water? \n (A) the sun (B) the wind (C) ocean currents (D) the
metal core
Knowledge: Earth’s water circulation is mostly driven by heat radiated from the sun.
Input: What do cells break down to produce energy? \n (A) food (B) water (C) chlorophyll (D)
carbon dioxide
Knowledge: Food contain calories.
Input: What characteristic of DNA results in cell differentiation in developing embryos? \n (A)
which genes are present (B) how many copies of each gene are present (C) which genes are
active (D) what protein is produced by a gene
Knowledge: Cell differentiation is caused by selective expression of genes.
Input: {question}
Knowledge:
Table 14: Prompt for ARC.
Task Prompt
AI2Sci Input: Which is a nonrenewable natural resource that is used to make electrical energy? \n (A)
coal (B) wind (C) water (D) thermal
Knowledge: Fossil fuel is nonrenewable natural resource.
Input: Which adaptation will warn predators not to eat an animal? \n (A) bright colors (B)
bulging eyes (C) geometric shapes (D) poisonous secretions
Knowledge: Bright colors in animals are usually a sign of being poisonous.
Input: An Italian scientist named Alessandro V olta invented the V oltaic pile in 1800. It was able
to produce a steady electrical current. Based on this description, what is the modern equivalent
of the V oltaic pile? \n (A) a wire (B) a battery (C) a resistor (D) a light bulb
Knowledge: Batteries can produce steady electrical current.
Input: What is the best measure to use in determining the effect of solar energy on Earth’s
atmosphere? \n (A) the temperature of the air (B) the temperature of the ocean (C) the density of
clouds in the sky (D) the amount of rainfall on a rainy day
Knowledge: Solar radiation converts to heat in Earth’s atmosphere.
Input: Which nongaseous compound can be made from two elements that are gases at room
temperature? \n (A) water (B) table salt (C) iron oxide (D) carbon dioxide
Knowledge: Water molecules are made of Hydrogen and Oxygen.
Input: {question}
Knowledge:
Table 15: Prompt for AI2Science.
Task Prompt
CSQA Input: Google Maps and other highway and street GPS services have replaced what? \n (A)
united states (B) mexico (C) countryside (D) atlas (E) oceans
Knowledge: Electronic maps are the modern version of paper atlas.
Input: The fox walked from the city into the forest, what was it looking for? \n (A) pretty ﬂowers.
(B) hen house (C) natural habitat (D) storybook (E) dense forest
Knowledge: Natural habitats are usually away from cities.
Input: You can share ﬁles with someone if you have a connection to a what? \n (A) freeway (B)
radio (C) wires (D) computer network (E) electrical circuit
Knowledge: Files can be shared over the Internet.
Input: Too many people want exotic snakes. The demand is driving what to carry them? \n (A)
ditch (B) shop (C) north america (D) pet shops (E) outdoors
Knowledge: Some people raise snakes as pets.
Input: The body guard was good at his duties, he made the person who hired him what? \n (A)
better job (B) irritated (C) feel safe (D) save money (E) headache
Knowledge: The job of body guards is to ensure the safety and security of the employer.
Input: {question}
Knowledge:
Table 16: Prompt for CommonsenseQA.
Task Prompt
QASC Input: What type of water formation is formed by clouds? \n (A) pearls (B) streams (C) shells
(D) diamonds (E) rain (F) beads (G) cooled (H) liquid
Knowledge: Clouds are made of water vapor.
Input: What can prevent food spoilage? \n (A) prolactin release (B) one celled organisms (C)
hydrating food (D) cleaning food (E) airing out food (F) Electric generators (G) a hydraulic
system (H) dehydrating food
Knowledge: Dehydrating food is used for preserving food.
Input: The process by which genes are passed is \n (A) Most plants (B) ﬂow of electrons (C)
mitosis (D) Summer (E) respiration (F) mutation (G) mechanical (H) reproduction
Knowledge: Genes are passed from parent to offspring.
Input: The stomach does what in the body? \n (A) decreases its bodily water (B) kills all germs
(C) breaks food into nutrients (D) stores bile (E) heat is produced (F) extracts water from food
(G) get chemical reactions started (H) cause people to become sick.
Knowledge: The stomach is part of the digestive system.
Input: What can cause rocks to break down? \n (A) Wind Barriers (B) Protective Barriers (C)
Stone Sealers (D) wind (E) mines (F) Water (G) erosion (H) Gravity
Knowledge: Mechanical weathering is when rocks are broken down by mechanical means.
Input: {question}
Knowledge:
Table 17: Prompt for QASC.
Task Prompt
PIQA Input: how do you ﬂood a room? \n (A) ﬁll it with objects. (B) ﬁll it with water.
Knowledge: Too much water can cause ﬂooding.
Input: How can I get oil stains out of my driveway? \n (A) Douse each stain with a couple cans
of beer. (B) Douse each stain with a couple cans of soda.
Knowledge: Sodium carbonate solution can wash away oil stains.
Input: Soothe a painful sunburn. \n (A) Wait until brewed tea bag is cool, then apply on burn.
(B) Wait until brewed tea bag is hot, then apply on burn.
Knowledge: Sunburn can be alleviated by applying cold material.
Input: What can I use for fuel in an alcohol stove? \n (A) Use acetone. (B) Use vinegar.
Knowledge: Acetone is ﬂammable, while vinegar is not.
Input: How can I cut the handles of metal cutlery? \n (A) Use a hand saw to cut the handles. (B)
Use a hand drill to cut the handles.
Knowledge: A hand saw is used for making cuts; a hand drill is used for making holes.
Input: {question}
Knowledge:
Table 18: Prompt for PhysicalIQA.
Task Prompt
SIQA Input: What will Quinn want to do next? \n (A) Eat messy snacks (B) help out a friend (C) Pick
up the dirty clothes \n Quinn wanted to help me clean my room up because it was so messy.
Knowledge: A messy room likely contains dirty clothes.
Input: What will Aubrey want to do next? \n (A) help Aubrey go back home (B) keep on partying
without the mom (C) going on with the mom \n Sasha’s mom passed out in the middle of the
party. Aubrey took Sasha’s mom to the hospital.
Knowledge: One should attend to their sick family member.
Input: How would Jan feel afterwards? \n (A) scared of losing the cat (B) normal (C) relieved
for ﬁxing the problem \n Their cat kept trying to escape out of the window, so Jan placed an
obstacle in the way.
Knowledge: One usually has positive emotions after solving a problem.
Input: How would Sydney feel afterwards? \n (A) affected (B) like they released their tension
(C) worse \n Sydney had so much pent up emotion, they burst into tears at work.
Knowledge: Crying can be a catharsis.
Input: What does Sydney need to do before this? \n (A) be bad at her job (B) do a good job (C)
be lazy \n Sydney got a raise and a new promotion.
Knowledge: Pay raise and promotion are usually results of good job performance.
Input: {question}
Knowledge:
Table 19: Prompt for SocialIQA.
Task Prompt
WG Input: The GPS and map helped me navigate home. I got lost when the _ got turned off. \n (A)
GPS (B) map
Knowledge: A GPS device is electronic, while a map is paper-based.
Input: I picked up a bag of peanuts and raisins for a snack. I wanted a sweeter snack out so I ate
the _ for now. \n (A) raisins (B) peanuts
Knowledge: Peanuts contain a lot of fat. Raisins contain a lot of sugar.
Input: The geese prefer to nest in the ﬁelds rather than the forests because in the _ predators are
more hidden. \n (A) ﬁelds (B) forests
Knowledge: There are more trees in the forests than in the ﬁelds.
Input: Once in Poland, Dennis enjoyed the trip more than Jason because _ had a shallow
understanding of the Polish language. \n (A) Dennis (B) Jason
Knowledge: Those who know the native language would enjoy the trip better.
Input: Adam put handwash only clothes in the washer but Aaron washed them by hand as _ was
lazy. \n (A) Adam (B) Aaron
Knowledge: Washing clothes with washer takes less effort than by hand.
Input: {question}
Knowledge:
Table 20: Prompt for Winogrande.