Title: Binding Language Models in Symbolic Languages

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
BINDING LANGUAGE MODELS IN SYMBOLIC LANGUAGES
Zhoujun Cheng ~Tianbao XiePeng Shi4Chengzu LiRahul Nadkarni|
Yushi Hu|Caiming Xiong♥Dragomir RadevFMari Ostendorf|
Luke Zettlemoyer|♦Noah A. Smith|}Tao Yu|
The University of Hong Kong~Shanghai Jiao Tong University|University of Washington
}Allen Institute for AI4University of Waterloo♥Salesforce ResearchFYale University♦Meta AI
ABSTRACT
Though end-to-end neural approaches have recently been dominating NLP tasks
in both performance and ease-of-use, they lack interpretability and robustness.
We propose BINDER , a training-free neural-symbolic framework that maps the
task input to a program, which (1) allows binding a uniﬁed API of language
model (LM) functionalities to a programming language ( e.g., SQL, Python) to
extend its grammar coverage and thus tackle more diverse questions, (2) adopts an
LM as both the program parser and the underlying model called by the API during
execution, and (3) requires only a few in-context exemplar annotations. Speciﬁcally,
we employ GPT-3 Codex as the LM. In the parsing stage, with only a few in-
context exemplars, Codex is able to identify the part of the task input that cannot
be answerable by the original programming language, correctly generate API calls
to prompt Codex to solve the unanswerable part, and identify where to place the
API calls while being compatible with the original grammar. In the execution stage,
Codex can perform versatile functionalities ( e.g., commonsense QA, information
extraction) given proper prompts in the API calls. BINDER achieves state-of-the-art
results on WIKITABLE QUESTIONS andTABFACT datasets, with explicit output
programs that beneﬁt human debugging. Note that previous best systems are all
ﬁnetuned on tens of thousands of task-speciﬁc samples, while BINDER only uses
dozens of annotations as in-context exemplars without any training. Our code is
available at https://github.com/hkunlp/binder1.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Performance on natural language processing tasks is dominated by neural end-to-end systems that
directly map inputs to outputs (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2020; Raffel et al.,
2020, i.a.). These end-to-end approaches are ﬂexible and easy-to-use while lacking interpretability
and robustness. This stands in contrast to symbolic approaches that produce explicit intermediate
representations such as logical forms, reasoning paths, or program code, which might then be executed
to derive a ﬁnal output (Zettlemoyer & Collins, 2005; Gulwani et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2019b, i.a.).
The intermediate form produced by these the resulting execution makes them more robust to input
changes. However, their semantic coverage is limited by the affordances of the grammar of the
selected symbolic language ( e.g., not being able to handle “North America?” in Fig. 1), leading
to failures on real-world diverse questions, and the intermediate form annotations require expert
knowledge and researcher labour.
A few works (Andreas et al., 2016; Gupta et al., 2019; Khot et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022, i.a.) have
been proposed to combine neural modules and symbolic languages ( neural-symbolic ) to leverage
advantages of both approaches. However, they require the elaborate human design of the symbolic
language and the calibration of corresponding neural modules to tackle problems in a speciﬁc domain
with large training data. More speciﬁcally, most of these works propose a task-speciﬁc symbolic
language and corresponding modules that cover only limited semantic phenomena in a speciﬁc task
and domain. Therefore, new languages and neural modules have to be introduced when adapting them
Equal contribution. Authors in alphabetical order. Work mainly done at the University of Hong Kong.
1More resources at https://lm-code-binder.github.io/ .
1arXiv:2210.02875v2  [cs.CL]  1 Mar 2023
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
no_chemicals 
y e s 
no 
no 
no  Bind er-Python
 df = df.sort_values( 'Sales',ascending =False)
 df = df[ ƒ( “N o rt h Ameri c a?” ; Made_in ) == ‘yes’]Whi ch is t he be s t-s ellin g shirt m a d e in  
N ort h Ameri c a  and  wi t h no chemi c al s ? 
GPT - 3 
C od e x … 
Bind er p r ogr am:  SQL/Python  b indin g LM API c all s 
P o l o 
Bind er-SQL
SELECT Shirt FROM T 
WHERE ƒ( “N o chemi c al s?” ; Shirt ) =‘yes’
  AND ƒ( “N o rt h Ameri c a?” ; Made_in ) =‘yes’
ORDER BY  Sales DESC LIMIT 1
Pr ogr am  
In t erp r e t er 
GPT - 3 
C od e x … 
p r o mp t 
Bind er 
par s in g 
p r o mp t e x e cu t e 
           un s tru c tur e d kno wl e d g e               s tru c tur e d kno wl e d g e ba s e 
             …              
… Shirt Made_in Sales Price 
P o l o U .S. 500 $29 .8 
L u cky l and U .S. 900 $19 .8 
T imber Ba y M e xi c o 400 $25.9 
Offi c e T ur k e y 600 $3 1.8              
…               D e t ail s 
● 100% c o tt o n 
● 220GSM (6.5 o z) 
● N a tur al s tr e t ch f o r 
c o m f o rt ab l e fi t… 
● ….. 
              D e t ail s 
● 90% c o tt o n, 
10% po ly e s t er 
● … SELECT Shirt FROM T 
WHERE N o_ C hemi c al s  =‘yes’
AND N o rt h_Ameri c a  =‘yes’
ORDER BY  Sales DESC LIMIT 1 
North_America 
y e s 
y e s 
y e s 
no 
U t iliz e GPT - 3 C od e x’ s  kno wl e d g e/ ab ili t i e s p r e di c t Shirt 
P o l o 
L u cky l and 
T imber Ba y 
Offi c e Made_in 
U .S. 
U .S. 
M e xi c o 
T ur k e y Q: “Is i t no 
chemi c al s?” Q: “Is i t N o rt h 
Ameri c a?” + 
Figure 1: An overview of the BINDER pipeline of two stages: parsing andexecution . (1) In the
parsing stage, the language model (LM) maps the input to a BINDER program given the question and
(optional) knowledge sources. The expressions with blue background in the program are API calls
to acquire external results. (2) In the execution stage, an LM serves to realize the API calls given
the prompt and the return values feed back into the original programming language. A deterministic
program interpreter executes the program without API calls to derive the ﬁnal answer.
to new tasks and domains. Their coverage is still restricted by the customized symbolic language and
neural modules. Moreover, they call for various and large training data to ensure all modules are well
trained. Therefore, we expect a neural-symbolic system that supports ﬂexible neural module calls that
will enable higher coverage for the symbolic language, while only requiring few annotations .
We propose BINDER , a training-free neural-symbolic framework that maps task inputs to an executable
program in a programming language (e.g., SQL, Python) bound with a uniﬁed API to call language
models (LMs; Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021) to perform versatile functionalities, i.e.aBINDER
program( e.g.,Binder-SQL, Binder-Python in Fig. 1), with only a few input- BINDER program annotations
as in-context exemplars. More speciﬁcally, BINDER ﬁrst prompts Codex, a code-pretrained of GPT-3,
to parse a question input into a BINDER program, in which Codex has to decide (1) which parts
in the input can be converted to the target programming language (question parts highlighted in
grey in Fig. 1), (2) the corresponding task API calls ( e.g.,f(“North America?”; Made_in )) to prompt
Codex to resolve the other parts, and (3) where to insert the API calls in the BINDER program. Next,
BINDER prompts Codex again to generate answers to the task API calls (given the generated task
prompts), integrates the generated results back to the programming language. Speciﬁcally as in Fig. 1,
the prompt ( e.g., “North America?") and data ( e.g., column Made _in) in API calls are fed into
Codex, and the output is a new column answering the prompt based on the input data ( i.e., yes/no of
whether a country in Made _incolumn is from North America). Finally, the program with standard
programming languages is executed the derive the ﬁnal answer.
In summary, BINDER enables ﬂexible functionality integration to the programming language to
improve its coverage and requires only a few annotations. BINDER program replaces custom
neural modules and task-speciﬁc languages with a uniﬁed prompting API call to Codex and general
programming languages, respectively, to handle much more diverse task inputs in open domains
without complex language and neural module design. BINDER is built on the advances of in-context
learning with language models and does not require any training and large-scale annotations.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the BINDER framework on WIKITABLE QUESTIONS (WIKITQ;
Pasupat & Liang, 2015) TABFACT (Chen et al., 2019a), two structured knowledge grounding datasets
that require complex reasoning on the tables. Using Codex (Chen et al., 2021) as the LM, BINDER
achieves state-of-the-art results on WIKITQandTABFACT. Note that the previous state-of-the-art
methods all require ﬁne-tuning on more than 10K annotated training examples or even massive
amounts of task-related pretraining data, while our method requires only a dozen or so annotations
without training. In further analysis, we ﬁnd that BINDER provides the greatest performance gain
on the questions that the original language grammar (SQL and Python) cannot support, indicating
thatBINDER effectively improves programming language coverage. We also demonstrate BINDER
can be applied on multi-modal knowledge sources (text, table, images, and combined) with MUL-
TIMODAL QA dataset (Talmor et al., 2021). Moreover, we show that BINDER , compared with
end-to-end approaches, is more interpretable when debugging the model, more scalable to very large
inputs, and more robust to noisy inputs.
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
2 A PPROACH
Task Deﬁnition Given an NLP task that accepts a natural language question/statement Qand
optional context(s) D(e.g., passages, tables, images, or a combination of the above) as inputs, the
goal is to output an answer Abased on the inputs to respond to Qcorrectly. For example, in passage
question answering, Qis a question about the passage(s) D; in table fact veriﬁcation, Qis a statement
about the table(s) D.
2.1 B INDER FRAMEWORK
Overview The BINDER framework to solve NLP tasks is deﬁned as follows: given a natural
language input Qand optional context(s) Das the input, an executable BINDER program Zis
generated. Finally, the output answer Ais derived by executing Zwith a B INDER interpreter.
BINDER Parsing In the parsing stage, the input natural language Qis parsed into a BINDER
program Z. ABINDER program is an expression in a symbolic language that optionally includes API
calls where the core symbolic language fails to provide a desired functionality. We deﬁne the API
call in the program as function f(^Q;^D)that accepts a question ^Qto be answered, and the context
^Dto be queried on. Here ^Qis the unanswerable part of Qwith the programming language only
and^Dis the relevant contexts in Dto answer ^Q. For example, “North America?” in Fig 1 is a ^Q,
and its corresponding contexts ^Dto answer ^Qis the column Made_in . Note ^Q=Qor^D=Dis
also valid (if ^Q=Qand^D=D, the program is equivalent to solving the problem with an LM in
end-to-end manner). The output of an API call f(^Q;^D)is the answer to ^Q, and it is represented as a
variable compatible with the symbolic language grammar so that the program can be executed.
BINDER Execution In the execution stage, the program Zis executed by a BINDER interpreter to
derive the answer A. The BINDER interpreter consists of a standard symbolic language interpreter and
the model(s) realizing the API calls. The execution phase includes lexical analysis, syntax analysis,
and program evaluation. In lexical and syntax analysis, f(^Q;^D)is added as a new identiﬁer in the
grammar, and the program is parsed as an abstract syntax tree (AST) based on this extended grammar.
In program evaluation, the API calls are evaluated by calling the underlying neural models. The
API call output is saved as a variable compatible with the standard symbolic language grammar,
and thus the program can be ﬁnally executed by an off-the-shelf symbolic language interpreter to
derive the output. Speciﬁcally, BINDER extends the symbolic language production rules to facilitate
parsing the BINDER program’s AST. The AST is evaluated in bottom-up order so that nested API
calls are also supported, which allows different degrees of decomposition and free combination of
language models for the complex question. We provide more details about the grammar extension
and a B INDER program AST in Appendix A.4.
2.2 I N-CONTEXT LEARNING FOR BINDER
Much recent work uses large language models for in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022b). Compared with ﬁne-tuning, in-context learning (1) only
takes a few annotations/demonstrations as a prompt, and (2) performs inference without training the
model parameters, which are both longstanding issues of conventional semantic parsing. We base our
experiments for BINDER on Codex, a code-pretrained version of GPT-3, which has been shown to
perform proﬁciently on code generation tasks (Rajkumar et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) and even
some weakly-related tasks like dialogue state tracking (Hu et al., 2022). We use Codex as both the
semantic parser and the model to perform API call functionalities.
In the parsing stage, it is challenging to generate BINDER programs because their grammar is different
from the original programming language grammar due to the inserted API calls. Thus, we take
advantage of the few-shot generalization ability of Codex and ﬁnd that it can learn the modiﬁed
grammar effectively with only a small number of in-context examples. In the execution stage, Codex
as the underlying LM serves to give the output to the API calls by concatenating the API call input,
^Qand^Das the language model prompt (the prompt style is described in Section 3.1). The Codex
output result(s) are stored as variables in the standard programming language so that a programming
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
language interpreter can execute on the combination of these variables and the rest part of the
program.
Speciﬁcally, we apply in-context learning for BINDER in the following manner: the inputs are k
in-context exemplars of f(Qi; Di; Zi)gk
i=1and the inference example (Q; D ). The kexamples should
balance the trade-off between the diversity of question types and the model’s maximum input capacity,
which can either be manually selected (ﬁxed) or automatically retrieved (dynamic) according to the
inference example. The model outputs are ncandidate BINDER programsZ=fZ1; :::; Z ngthat
aim to solve the inference question Q. Next, the programs Zare executed by the BINDER interpreter
producing nanswersA=fA1; :::; A ng. Finally, the output answer Ais derived via a majority
voting strategy over the set of produced answers A(the voting method is similar to the one used by
MBR-EXEC (Shi et al., 2022), which we elaborate on in Appendix A.3). The values of kandnare
hyperparameters in the process above.
2.3 B INDER IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we describe our implementation of BINDER with SQL and Python over structured
knowledge as a demonstration. As BINDER is designed to be extensible to various programming
languages and API call functionalities, we introduce a pipeline for users to quickly adapt BINDER to
a new domain in Appendix D.
We implement two APIs — fcol(^Q;^D)andfval(^Q;^D), where ^D=fc1; :::; cj^Djgis a (sub-)table
of a set of table columns, and c=fvi; :::; vjcjgis a column ﬁlled with cell values. Based on ^Q,fcol
maps ^Dintoa column , andfvalmaps ^Dintoa value . Since both return types, i.e., column and value,
are compatible with the grammars of SQL and Python (with the Pandas package), fcolandfvalAPIs
are inserted to replace the columns and values to form a valid B INDER program.
Take the question “ which is the best-selling shirt made in North America and with no chemicals? " in
Fig 1 as an example. The country names in the Made_in column do not provide enough information
on their own to indicate what their continents are, and thus pure SQL cannot solve it (with this table’s
data). However, it is easy for a (large) language model to answer whether a country is from North
America, which is represented by the fcol(“North America?”;Made_in) expression in the position of a
column name in standard SQL. Similarly, the expression fcol(“No chemicals?”;Shirt) calls a (large)
language model to identify whether the shirts consist of no chemicals ( i.e., pure cotton in this case)
based on the textual details in the Shirt column.
When a (sub-)question is too complex or infeasible to be solved by creating an intermediate new
column with fcol, we turn to fvalto directly derive the answer. For example, given the question
“which shirt is the most suitable for a formal event? ” on the table in Fig 1, it is hard to map Shirt to a
new column of “formality value” followed by a SQL “ORDER BY” clause. Thus, the expression will
befval(“The most formal?”;Shirt) , that outputs a value as the answer. fvallooks more like end-to-end
QA, with two important differences: (1) it can be integrated into more compositional SQL queries
using its result as a value, (2) it inputs the sub-table instead of the whole table which can mitigate the
challenge of input capacity.
3 E XPERIMENTS
3.1 E XPERIMENT SETUP
Datasets We evaluate our method on three knowledge grounding datasets which were all previously
dominated by end-to-end methods: WIKITQ(Pasupat & Liang, 2015) and TABFACT (Chen et al.,
2019a). WIKITQrequires complex table reasoning skills to answer the questions. Furthermore,
according to SQUALL (Shi et al., 2020b), about 20% ofWIKITQquestions are not answerable
by pure SQL, either because of the need for extra knowledge or the limited coverage of the SQL
grammar, both of which are issues that BINDER is designed to address. TABFACT is a binary fact
veriﬁcation benchmark over small tables, on which end-to-end methods have a large advantage but
offer no interpretability.
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Method Dev. Test
Finetuned
T5-3B (Xie et al., 2022) 51:9 50 :6
Tapex (Liu et al., 2021) 60:4 59 :1
TaCube (Zhou et al., 2022) 61:1 61 :3
OmniTab (Jiang et al., 2022) - 63:3
Without Finetuning
Codex end-to-end QA 50:5 48 :7
Codex SQLy60:2 61 :1
Codex B INDERy(Ours) 65.0 64.6
Table 1: WIKITQexecution accuracy on de-
velopment and test sets. ydenotes a symbolic
method that outputs intermediate languages.Method Test
Finetuned
SASPy(Ou & Liu, 2022) 77:0
BART-Large (Lewis et al., 2020) 82:5
T5-3B (Xie et al., 2022) 85:4
Tapex (Liu et al., 2021) 85.9
Without Finetuning
Codex end-to-end QA 72:6
Codex SQLy80:7
Codex B INDERy(Ours) 85.1
with few-shot retriever 86.0
Table 2: TABFACT accuracy on the ofﬁcial small
test set.ydenotes a symbolic method that outputs
intermediate languages.
Evaluation The evaluation metrics are execution accuracy (EA) for WIKITQandTABFACT
following common practice for these datasets. Program executions are likely to be semantically
correct but fail to match the gold answer exactly – for example, SQL outputs 1/0 for yes/no questions.
Though this is considered correct according to human evaluation, it is regarded as incorrect by the
exact match evaluator. Thus, we add a pre-matching check for these semantically correct cases in
WIKITQto the ofﬁcial evaluator. For a fair comparison, we compute the outputs of all baseline
methods and re-evaluate them using the same evaluator. We provide more details on the evaluator in
Appendix A.5, and list the results with the ofﬁcial evaluator for all baselines and our method in C.2.
Baselines We compare our method to a series of strong published methods on these datasets,
including Tapex (Liu et al., 2021), OmniTab (Jiang et al., 2022), TaCube (Zhou et al., 2022), T5-
3B (Xie et al., 2022; Raffel et al., 2020), and SASP (Ou & Liu, 2022). These baselines are ﬁne-tuned
on the full-size training set, and many of them (Liu et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022) are even further
pretrained on a domain-relevant corpus of extra data which is speciﬁc to the target domain and task,
while B INDER is training-free and only requires a few in-context exemplar annotations.
To further demonstrate the effectiveness of BINDER , we also evaluate Codex with additional inference
modes including: (1) end-to-end QA, i.e., directly outputting the answer based on the input question
and table; and (2) semantic parsing with the standard SQL language. Due to page limits, we refer
readers interested in these baselines to their respective papers for details (Liu et al., 2021; Jiang et al.,
2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022; Raffel et al., 2020; Ou & Liu, 2022), and we present a
complete list and evaluation results of more previous systems on these datasets in Appendix C.1.
Implementation Details We use the OpenAI Codex (code-davinci-002) API2model in our exper-
iments as both the parser to generate programs and as the underlying model for API calls during
the execution of each program. We annotate 14in-context exemplars with BINDER programs for
each dataset, which are selected considering the diversity of question types in demonstrations and the
maximum token limit for Codex ( 8;000tokens). The prompt format mainly follows (Rajkumar et al.,
2022), which inputs the table schema and the ﬁrst three table rows. The detailed prompt templates
we use for each dataset are listed in Appendix A.1. On TABFACT, we further annotate a pool of
200examples with BINDER programs from the training set using vote- kselective annotation (Su
et al., 2022), and use them by retrieving relevant few-shot examples for each inference example
via maximum inner-product similarity of the SentenceBert (Clark et al., 2019) embeddings of the
questions. The Codex hyperparameters for parsing and execution are provided in Appendix A.2.
Empirically, it takes about 6hours on average to evaluate 1;000examples (i.e., generate and execute
20programs per example) given that Codex allows 200queries per minute. We evaluate on the
ofﬁcial small test set ( 2;000samples) of T ABFACT considering the time cost.
3.2 M AINRESULTS
WIKITQ All results on the WIKITQdataset are shown in Table 1. Our Codex BINDER outperforms
listed strong baseline systems by a large margin, surpassing the previous state-of-the-art by absolute
2https://beta.openai.com/
5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Method Program-unsolvable Program-solvable Overall
T5-3B (Xie et al., 2022) 37:6 56 :0 51 :9
Tapex (Liu et al., 2021) 33:6 68 :0 60 :4
TaCube (Zhou et al., 2022) 34:9 68 :5 61 :1
Codex end-to-end QA 40:3 53 :4 50 :5
w/o table inputs 14:2 11 :9 12 :4
Codex SQL 31:2 68 :4 60 :2
Codex B INDER (Ours) 41.3 71.8 65.0
Table 3: Decomposition of execution accuracy on WIKITQdevelopment set. The questions annotated
with SQL by SQUALL (Shi et al., 2020b) dataset are denoted program-solvable , and the rest are
program-unsolvable . OmniTab (Jiang et al., 2022) didn’t provide its result on the development set.
1:3%. Note that all baseline methods require access to the full training dataset and further ﬁne-tuning,
while our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance with only 14example annotations. Codex
BINDER improves over semantic parsing with standard SQL by 3:5%on the test set, indicating
BINDER indeed mitigates the coverage limitations of the original language. Furthermore, both Codex
BINDER and Codex SQL deliver dramatic advantages ( 15:9%and12:4%) over end-to-end QA,
showing that semantic parsing with Codex is a better default choice when it comes to structured
knowledge grounding and code-related tasks. A ﬁne-grained analysis on why BINDER outperforms
end-to-end QA and pure SQL is provided in Section 4.1.
TABFACT Table 2 presents the results on TABFACT’s ofﬁcial small test set. Codex BINDER sub-
stantially surpasses the previous best symbolic method SASP by 8:1%. Note symbolic methods
usually fall behind end-to-end manners in fact veriﬁcation (binary classiﬁcation) since the answer
space is small. When retrieving a few relevant questions from the annotated pool of 200exam-
ples, our method achieves new state-of-the-art results, outperforming the previous best ﬁne-tuned
method. However, the improvement provided by retrieving a few similar examples is comparatively
small ( 0:9%). Effective sample selection methods for in-context learning remain an open challenge.
Within the Codex few-shot setting (no few-shot retriever), BINDER shows a large advantage over
standard SQL ( 4:4%) and end-to-end QA ( 12:5%), indicating the necessity of B INDER framework.
Besides the performance gain, BINDER has the additional advantages of (1) interpretability that
beneﬁts human debugging and (2) robustness that makes it stable to large or noisy inputs. We
elaborate on these in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
4 A NALYSIS
4.1 A BLATION STUDY
Binding neural module API calls into a programming language can help solve queries that are
unsolvable in that language alone. Therefore, we are particularly interested in the performance
ofBINDER on the unsolvable questions. According to SQUALL (Shi et al., 2020b), about 20%
ofWIKITQquestions cannot be annotated in SQL; we call these program-unsolvable , and refer
to the annotated ones as program-solvable . As presented in Table 3, Codex BINDER signiﬁcantly
outperforms Codex SQL by 10:1%onprogram-unsolvable questions, aligned with the motivation
of our design. Our method even performs better than all end-to-end QA methods on the program-
unsolvable part, which are supposed to be more robust to this subset of the examples. We note that
while SQL performs well on about 31:2%of unsolvable questions, many are spurious programs that
derive the correct answer by accident. BINDER largely mitigates this phenomenon. We randomly
pick100correct predictions in program-unsolvable set shared by SQL and BINDER and ﬁnd that
BINDER has a much lower spurious rate than SQL ( 12% vs.33%). One thing to note is that BINDER
also achieves a higher score than SQL on program-solvable . We ﬁnd that this is because some tables
are manually cleaned ( e.g., extracting numerical parts from the text) to run the annotated SQLs by
SQUALL , which means there also exist unsolvable questions even in the program-solvable subset.
We elaborate on our manual statistics about the proportion of WIKITQthat can be solved with SQL
in Appendix C.4. We also present to what extent Codex itself can answer the question only using its
internal knowledge. Codex can only answer a few WIKITQquestions ( 12:4%) correctly, indicating it
is not pretrained to overﬁt to the downstream dataset questions.
6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Error Type Description Proportion(%)
Syntax error Incorrect program syntax (invalid grammar) 5%
Semantic error Incorrect program semantics 64%
Token Incorrect or missing column/value/operator 10%
Structure Incorrect program structure (valid grammar) 22%
BINDER usage Missing B INDER API usage 32%
Incorrect execution Incorrect execution answer with the correct program 15%
False negative Incorrect annotations or misjudge in evaluator 16%
Table 4: Error types of 100samples from W IKITQ development set of B INDER (SQL).
System Program Answer
End-to-end QA – 1967
SQLSELECT year FROM t WHERE win_team=’kansas state’ AND
win_team - los_team > 10<empty>
BINDERSELECT year FROM t WHERE win_team=’kansas state’ AND
f("Points?";win_team) - f("Points?";los_team) > 10<empty>
Table 5: An example from WIKITQdevelopment set. The query is “ When was the ﬁrst game that
kansas state won by double digits? " and the gold answer is 1926 . The incorrect segment(s) of each
output are marked in red. See Appendix E for full context of this example.
4.2 I NTERPRETABILITY
An important advantage BINDER provides is the improvement in interpretability over the end-to-
end approaches, where the explicit program can assist human debugging and error analysis. We
sample 100error cases from WIKITQdev set (approximately 10% of all incorrect examples) of the
Codex BINDER (on SQL) for error analysis. We classify errors into syntax error, semantic error,
incorrect execution, and false negative, as listed in Table 4. More details about the classiﬁcation and
example demonstrations are listed in Appendix E. For WIKITQ, the errors mainly lie in the BINDER
usage ( 32%) and structure errors ( 22%) of semantic errors, and incorrect execution ( 15%). This
indicates that 32% of incorrect examples can be further corrected if BINDER is used and 15% can be
corrected through better execution, e.g., by leveraging more powerful LMs, using better in-context
learning methods, and annotating more exemplars.
We also use an example to show the advantages of using BINDER for debugging and interpreting
results. As shown in the example in Table 5, the result from the end-to-end system is 1967 , which
is incorrect but provides no clue to the reason behind this prediction. The result from BINDER is
incorrect, since the program uses the incorrect value and operator regarding the win_team column
from the table (should be “LIKE "%kansas state%"”), and it can be potentially ﬁxed in the future
by adding similar in-context exemplars or fuzzy match postprocessing. For standard SQL, though
we ﬁnd the direct subtraction of win_team los_team is incorrect (contain non-numerical text), it
cannot be ﬁxed for its limited grammar coverage. Thus, in this example, BINDER enables ﬁnding the
source of the error (an advantage over the end-to-end approach) while also being expressive enough
for users to ﬁnd a way to ﬁx it (an advantage over a pure symbolic system), making BINDER ﬁt for
debugging and enabling interpretability of a system that uses it. We leave it to future work to develop
more systematic evaluation methods that consider ease of debugging by estimating human effort to
correct system errors.
4.3 R OBUSTNESS
4.3.1 S CALABILITY
A great advantage of BINDER over end-to-end QA is the scalability, i.e., parsing and executing the
symbolic language is always practical even when the knowledge source is too large ( e.g., company
databases, domain knowledge graphs) to ﬁt into the model input capacity or memory, while end-to-
end QA fails or degrades since it requires the whole table as input to predict the answer. We expand
tables with 100,200, and 500rows from a WIKITQdevelopment subset (random 150samples)
by prompting Codex to populate the original table with content-consistent rows, and then have
two annotators annotate question-answer pairs manually. When the table is too large for Codex’s
maximum token limit ( 8;000tokens), we truncate table rows until it ﬁts. As shown in Figure 2, Codex
7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Figure 2: Execution accuracy on WIKITQwith
very large tables (original, 100,200,500rows).
Figure 3: Execution accuracy on WIKITQwith
noisy content in tables.
Method Program-unsolvable
Codex Python 30:7
Codex B INDER (Ours) 34.4
Table 6: WIKITQ accuracy on program-
unsolvable subset using Python as the program-
ming language.Method F1 EM
Finetuned
Implicit-Decomp (Talmor et al., 2021) 55:5 48 :8
PReasM-Large (Yoran et al., 2022) 65.5 59.0
Without Finetuning
Codex end-to-end QA 55:4 48 :0
Codex B INDER (Ours) 57:1 51 :0
with oracle retriever 64.5 58.1
Table 7: MMQA F1/EM on development set.
end-to-end QA performance drops dramatically as table size increases, while BINDER consistently
outperforms it with only slight performance decreases. Note that the input of BINDER is only three
table rows for all table sizes.
4.3.2 N OISY CONTENT
End-to-end methods are more brittle to noisy inputs, especially when there exists distractors that are
similar to the question-relevant (gold) contents. We build a noisy WIKITQdevelopment subset (ran-
dom150samples) with distractors in three steps: (1) the gold table cells and columns are found using
a heuristic fuzzy match, (2) replace 15% cells in gold columns with either textthat has the smallest
edit distance to the gold cell string in the WordNet corpus or number that equals to the gold cell value
1, (3) have one annotator check that question-answer pairs are valid after content disturbance. As
shown in Figure 3, BINDER is stable confronting distractors ( 1:3%#), while end-to-end QA is more
likely to be confused by similar text and numbers ( 6:7%#).
4.4 B INDER EXTENSION
BINDER with Python We design BINDER to be easily extensible to various programming
languages. Thus, we explore using Python (with the Pandas package) as the BINDER language
onWIKITQ. Similar to SQL, BINDER with Python is implemented by incorporating the f(;)neu-
ral API into it. Since the neural API also calls language models with Python, we just use the original
Python interpreter to execute our BINDER with Python. We evaluated it on the program-unsolvable
subset of WIKITQto test whether our method improves Python’s capability. Though this subset is
split based on SQL, Python shares some similar weaknesses with SQL, such as in cases with external
knowledge requirements and unsupported functionality. As shown in Table 6, BINDER with Python
effectively improves the Python coverage on the difﬁcult subset. The gap between Python and SQL
performance on WIKITQmay lie in the properties of each programming language, as suggested
by Guo et al. (2020). We conjecture that Codex is more familiar with semantic parsing to SQL for
tabular data, while Python is not as commonly used in this context.
MultiModal Application We further explore applying BINDER on the multi-modal dataset MUL-
TIMODAL QA(MMQA ) across text, tables, and images. To input images into the LM program
generation, images are converted into textual image captions with a vision-text pretrained model
OFA (Wang et al., 2022) in advance. For table-related questions, the BINDER program is based
8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
on SQL. For non-table questions, a program with fvalis generated with the targeted passage or
image title(s). We follow Yoran et al. (2022) to retrieve the question-relevant passages and images
in preprocessing. As far as we know, we are the ﬁrst to demonstrate that multi-modal QA across
text, tables, and images can be handled with interpretable and executable programs. As listed in
Table 7, under the Codex few-shot setting, BINDER achieves better performance than end-to-end QA
and the ﬁne-tuned baseline Implicit-Decomp, showing the feasibility of BINDER on multi-modal
knowledge sources. With the oracle retriever that assumes gold passages and images are given for
each question, BINDER can achieve comparable performance with the state-of-the-art, showing the
potential of B INDER approach in the future.
5 R ELATED WORK
Semantic Parsing Semantic parsing (Zelle & Mooney, 1996; Zettlemoyer & Collins, 2005) has
been a mainstay of symbolic methods that produce an executable program given natural language
input, generate intermediate structures that assist problem-solving, and improve interpretability over
the neural methods which generate solution directly that came later. Structured knowledge grounding
tasks mainly adopt semantic parsing since symbolic languages like SQL, SPARQL can be executed
on them (Berant et al., 2013; Liang et al., 2017; Yin & Neubig, 2017; Zhong et al., 2018; Yu et al.,
2018; Shaw et al., 2021; Scholak et al., 2021). Beyond structured knowledge, Chen et al. (2019b) and
Thorne et al. (2021) design domain-speciﬁc languages executable on text. Recently, Chen et al. (2021)
propose a generative pre-trained language model for code generation that require no additional human
annotation. Many works propose methods based on this model and achieve great success (Rajkumar
et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022). However, the semantic parsing method is restricted by its grammar
coverage, unable to solve problems requiring external knowledge or functions.
Neural-Symbolic Methods Some works integrate neural modules with symbolic languages for the
advantage of both approaches, i.e., good performance and interpretability. Andreas et al. (2016);
Hu et al. (2017); Das et al. (2018) and Gupta et al. (2019) generate programs that are further softly
executed by the corresponding neural modules. Khot et al. (2021) propose text module networks
to solve complex tasks by decomposing them into simpler ones solvable by existing QA models
and a symbolic calculator. BREAK (Wolfson et al., 2020) proposes a meaningful representation,
QDMR, that decomposes the question into multiple steps. However, they require the elaborate design
of functions to be used in corresponding task and the calibration of corresponding neural modules
which require complicated training steps and large training data (normally tens of thousands) to tackle
problems in a speciﬁc domain.
Compared with these methods, BINDER is expressive and ﬂexible to handle real-world diverse
questions since it is able to make proper API calls to enhance its functionalities. Moreover, BINDER is
training-free and requires only dozens of annotations based on certain symbolic language to perform
on a domain speciﬁc task while maintaining: excellent performance, ability in scaling on input,
interpretabilityand robustness over noisy content.
6 C ONCLUSION
We propose BINDER , a training-free neural-symbolic framework that maps the task input to a program
that allows binding a uniﬁed LM API for additional functionalities. BINDER aims to combine the
strengths of end-to-end approaches (high coverage) and symbolic approaches (high interpretability).
Using Codex as the LM, B INDER achieves state-of-the-art performance on W IKITQ and T ABFACT
with only dozens of in-context demonstrations and no additional training. In contrast, the best existing
systems are ﬁnetuned on thousands of task-speciﬁc training samples and may require further domain-
speciﬁc pertaining. We also perform a series of analyses of BINDER , decomposing performance
gains, examining robustness to large or noisy inputs, applying it to multi-modal knowledge sources,
and extending it to the Python language. We regard BINDER as a new, language model-focused
attempt to integrate two widely-adopted paradigms in NLP: end-to-end and symbolic approaches.
With the recent powerful large language models, it has become feasible that BINDER programs are
generated and executed correctly in a training-free manner. In the future, we believe BINDER can be
extended to many more scenarios with the appropriate programming language and functionalities,
and we hope it can inspire more creative ideas on balancing model capability and interpretability.
9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
7 R EPRODUCIBILITY
BINDER experiments are mainly based on OpenAI Codex (code-davinci-002) API3. We provide (1)
the input prompt templates we use in Appendix A.1, (2) Codex hyper-parameters for each dataset we
adopt in Appendix A.2, (3) more implementation details in Appendix A. Besides, we also upload our
source code in the materials making our results easy to be reproduced.
3https://beta.openai.com/
10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
REFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Chen Liang, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. Learning to generalize
from sparse and underspeciﬁed rewards. In International conference on machine learning , pp.
130–140. PMLR, 2019.
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Neural module networks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 39–48, 2016.
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy Liang. Semantic parsing on Freebase from
question-answer pairs. In Proc. of EMNLP , 2013. URL https://aclanthology.org/
D13-1160 .
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
Ariel Herbert-V oss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel
Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Rad-
ford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Proc.
of NeurIPS , 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf .
Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen.
Codet: Code generation with generated tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10397 , 2022.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021.
Wenhu Chen, Hongmin Wang, Jianshu Chen, Yunkai Zhang, Hong Wang, Shiyang Li, Xiyou Zhou,
and William Yang Wang. Tabfact: A large-scale dataset for table-based fact veriﬁcation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.02164 , 2019a.
Xinyun Chen, Chen Liang, Adams Wei Yu, Denny Zhou, Dawn Song, and Quoc V Le. Neural
symbolic reader: Scalable integration of distributed and symbolic representations for reading
comprehension. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019b.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311 , 2022a.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311 , 2022b.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-ﬁnetuned language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416 , 2022.
Elizabeth Clark, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Noah A. Smith. Sentence mover’s similarity: Automatic eval-
uation for multi-sentence texts. In Proc. of ACL , July 2019. URL https://aclanthology.
org/P19-1264/ .
Abhishek Das, Georgia Gkioxari, Stefan Lee, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Neural modular control
for embodied question answering. In Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 53–62. PMLR, 2018.
Pradeep Dasigi, Matt Gardner, Shikhar Murty, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Eduard Hovy. Iterative
search for weakly supervised semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pp. 2669–2680, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proc. of NAACL , 2019. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/810.04805 .
11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Julian Eisenschlos, Syrine Krichene, and Thomas Mueller. Understanding tables with intermediate
pre-training. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pp.
281–296, 2020.
Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, et al. Program synthesis. Foundations and
Trends® in Programming Languages , 4(1-2):1–119, 2017.
Jiaqi Guo, Qian Liu, Jian-Guang Lou, Zhenwen Li, Xueqing Liu, Tao Xie, and Ting Liu. Benchmark-
ing meaning representations in neural semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pp. 1520–1540, 2020.
Jiaqi Guo, Jian-Guang Lou, Ting Liu, and Dongmei Zhang. Weakly supervised semantic pars-
ing by learning from mistakes. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2021 , pp. 2603–2617, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.ﬁndings-emnlp.222. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.222 .
Nitish Gupta, Kevin Lin, Dan Roth, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Neural module networks for
reasoning over text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04971 , 2019.
Jonathan Herzig, P. Nowak, Thomas Müller, Francesco Piccinno, and Julian Martin Eisenschlos.
Tapas: Weakly supervised table parsing via pre-training. In Proceedings of ACL , 2020.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556 , 2022.
Ronghang Hu, Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Learning to
reason: End-to-end module networks for visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , pp. 804–813, 2017.
Yushi Hu, Chia-Hsuan Lee, Tianbao Xie, Tao Yu, Noah A Smith, and Mari Ostendorf. In-context
learning for few-shot dialogue state tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08568 , 2022.
Zhengbao Jiang, Yi Mao, Pengcheng He, Graham Neubig, and Weizhu Chen. Omnitab: Pretraining
with natural and synthetic data for few-shot table-based question answering. In Proceedings of the
2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies , pp. 932–942, 2022.
Tushar Khot, Daniel Khashabi, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. Text modular
networks: Learning to decompose tasks in the language of existing models. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies , pp. 1264–1279, 2021.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
language models are zero-shot reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11916 , 2022.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for
natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Proc. of ACL , July 2020. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13461 .
Chen Liang, Jonathan Berant, Quoc Le, Kenneth D. Forbus, and Ni Lao. Neural symbolic machines:
Learning semantic parsers on Freebase with weak supervision. In Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pp. 23–33, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/P17-1003. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1003 .
Chen Liang, Mohammad Norouzi, Jonathan Berant, Quoc V Le, and Ni Lao. Memory augmented
policy optimization for program synthesis and semantic parsing. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 31, 2018.
Qian Liu, Bei Chen, Jiaqi Guo, Zeqi Lin, and Jian guang Lou. Tapex: Table pre-training via learning
a neural sql executor, 2021.
12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019.
Arvind Neelakantan, Quoc V Le, and Ilya Sutskever. Neural programmer: Inducing latent programs
with gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.04834 , 2015.
Suixin Ou and Yongmei Liu. Learning to generate programs for table fact veriﬁcation via structure-
aware semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 7624–7638, Dublin, Ireland, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.525. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.525 .
Panupong Pasupat and Percy Liang. Compositional semantic parsing on semi-structured tables.
InProceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pp. 1470–1480, Beijing, China, July 2015. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.3115/v1/P15-1142. URL https://aclanthology.org/P15-1142 .
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer. JLMR , 21, 2020. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html .
Nitarshan Rajkumar, Raymond Li, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. Evaluating the text-to-sql capabilities of
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00498 , 2022.
Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for con-
strained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 9895–9901, Online and Punta Cana, Do-
minican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
2021.emnlp-main.779. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.779 .
Peter Shaw, Ming-Wei Chang, Panupong Pasupat, and Kristina Toutanova. Compositional gen-
eralization and natural language variation: Can a semantic parsing approach handle both? In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Freda Shi, Daniel Fried, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sida I Wang. Natural language
to code translation with execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11454 , 2022.
Qi Shi, Yu Zhang, Qingyu Yin, and Ting Liu. Learn to combine linguistic and symbolic informa-
tion for table-based fact veriﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics , pp. 5335–5346, 2020a.
Tianze Shi, Chen Zhao, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Hal Daumé III, and Lillian Lee. On the potential of
lexico-logical alignments for semantic parsing to sql queries. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pp. 1849–1864, 2020b.
Hongjin Su, Jungo Kasai, Chen Henry Wu, Weijia Shi, Tianlu Wang, Jiayi Xin, Rui Zhang, Mari
Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, et al. Selective annotation makes language models
better few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01975 , 2022.
Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Amnon Catav, Dan Lahav, Yizhong Wang, Akari Asai, Gabriel Ilharco,
Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Jonathan Berant. Multimodalqa: Complex question answering over text,
tables and images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06039 , 2021.
James Thorne, Majid Yazdani, Marzieh Saeidi, Fabrizio Silvestri, Sebastian Riedel, and Alon Halevy.
Database reasoning over text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01074 , 2021.
Bailin Wang, Ivan Titov, and Mirella Lapata. Learning semantic parsers from denotations with latent
structured alignments and abstract programs. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pp. 3774–3785, 2019.
13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Peng Wang, An Yang, Rui Men, Junyang Lin, Shuai Bai, Zhikang Li, Jianxin Ma, Chang Zhou,
Jingren Zhou, and Hongxia Yang. Unifying architectures, tasks, and modalities through a simple
sequence-to-sequence learning framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03052 , 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.11903 , 2022.
Tomer Wolfson, Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, Matt Gardner, Yoav Goldberg, Daniel Deutch, and Jonathan
Berant. Break it down: A question understanding benchmark. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , 2020.
Tianbao Xie, Chen Henry Wu, Peng Shi, Ruiqi Zhong, Torsten Scholak, Michihiro Yasunaga, Chien-
Sheng Wu, Ming Zhong, Pengcheng Yin, Sida I. Wang, Victor Zhong, Bailin Wang, Chengzu Li,
Connor Boyle, Ansong Ni, Ziyu Yao, Dragomir Radev, Caiming Xiong, Lingpeng Kong, Rui Zhang,
Noah A. Smith, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Tao Yu. Uniﬁedskg: Unifying and multi-tasking structured
knowledge grounding with text-to-text language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05966 , 2022.
Xiaoyu Yang, Feng Nie, Yufei Feng, Quan Liu, Zhigang Chen, and Xiaodan Zhu. Program enhanced
fact veriﬁcation with verbalization and graph attention network. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pp. 7810–7825,
2020.
Pengcheng Yin and Graham Neubig. A syntactic neural model for general-purpose code generation. In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers) , pp. 440–450, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1041. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1041 .
Pengcheng Yin, Graham Neubig, Wen-tau Yih, and Sebastian Riedel. TaBERT: Pretraining for
joint understanding of textual and tabular data. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics . Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020.
Ori Yoran, Alon Talmor, and Jonathan Berant. Turning tables: Generating examples from semi-
structured tables for endowing language models with reasoning skills. In Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp.
6016–6031, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
v1/2022.acl-long.416. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.416 .
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li,
Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, et al. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex
and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 3911–3921, 2018.
Tao Yu, Chien-Sheng Wu, Xi Victoria Lin, Yi Chern Tan, Xinyi Yang, Dragomir Radev, Caiming
Xiong, et al. Grappa: Grammar-augmented pre-training for table semantic parsing. In International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2020.
John M. Zelle and Raymond J. Mooney. Learning to parse database queries using inductive logic
programming. In AAAI 1996 , pp. 1050–1055, 1996.
Luke S. Zettlemoyer and Michael Collins. Learning to map sentences to logical form: Structured
classiﬁcation with probabilistic categorial grammars. UAI, 2005.
Yuchen Zhang, Panupong Pasupat, and Percy Liang. Macro grammars and holistic triggering for
efﬁcient semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing , pp. 1214–1223, 2017.
Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries from
natural language using reinforcement learning. 2018.
Wanjun Zhong, Duyu Tang, Zhangyin Feng, Nan Duan, Ming Zhou, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou,
Daxin Jiang, Jiahai Wang, and Jian Yin. Logicalfactchecker: Leveraging logical operations for
fact checking with graph module network. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pp. 6053–6065, 2020.
14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Fan Zhou, Mengkang Hu, Haoyu Dong, Zhoujun Cheng, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. Tacube:
Pre-computing data cubes for answering numerical-reasoning questions over tabular data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.12682 , 2022.
Zhaocheng Zhu, Mikhail Galkin, Zuobai Zhang, and Jian Tang. Neural-symbolic models for logical
queries on knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10128 , 2022.
15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Appendices
A M ORE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We present more details in our implementation of Codex B INDER for interested readers.
A.1 C ODEX INPUT PROMPTS
We list prompts we use in main experiments for BINDER for each dataset. As shown, the prompt
starts with an instruction describing the task, followed by a few examples for in-context learning. We
follow Rajkumar et al. (2022) table prompt format: (1) “CREATE TABLE” schema; (2) the ﬁrst three
rows of the table; (3) the question Qand parsed logic form BINDER program. Besides, we also add
row_id and lower case all table contents, which we ﬁnd will improve the Codex parsing performance.
For the sample to be inferenced, we empty the BINDER program to let Codex generate it, and input
the full table to provide more information. If the full table is too large, we will shrink number of
in-context shots until the table ﬁts within the Codex max token limits.
## WikiTQ
Generate SQL given the question and table to answer
the question correctly.
...
CREATE TABLE Electoral district of Lachlan(
row_id int,
member text,
party text,
term text)
/*
3 example rows:
SELECT *FROM w LIMIT 3;
row_id member party term
0 john ryan none 1859-1864
1 james martin none 1864-1869
2 james watson none 1869-1880
*/
Q: of the members of the third incarnation of the lachlan,
who served the longest?
Binder: SELECT member FROM w ORDER BY
f("How long does it last?"; term) DESC LIMIT 1
## TabFact
Generate SQL given the statement and table to verify
the statement correctly.
...
CREATE TABLE british records in athletics(
row_id int,
event text,
data text,
athlete text,
date text,
place text)
/*
3 example rows:
SELECT *FROM w LIMIT 3;
row_id event data athlete date place
0 5 km t19:29 andi drake 1990-05-27 00:00:00 søfteland , norway
16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
1 5 miles 32:38 + ian mccombie 1985-03-23 00:00:00
york , united kingdom
2 10 km 40:17 chris maddocks 1989-04-30 00:00:00
burrator , united kingdom
*/
Q: there be 8 different event that take place within
the united kingdom
Binder: SELECT (SELECT COUNT(place) FROM w WHERE
f("Is it in united kingdom?"; place) = ’yes’) = 8
## MMQA
Generate SQL given the question, table, passages, image captions
to answer the question correctly.
...
CREATE TABLE 2018 Warrington Wolves season(
row_id int,
player text,
signed from text,
contract length text,
announced text)
/*
3 example rows:
SELECT *FROM w LIMIT 3;
row_id player signed from contract length announced
0 sitaleki akauola penrith panthers 2 2017-08-01
1 bryson goodwin south sydney rabbitohs 2 2017-10-01
2 tyrone roberts gold coast titans 3 2017-10-01
*/
CREATE TABLE Images(
row_id int,
gold coast titans text)
/*
All rows of the table:
SELECT *FROM w;
row_id gold coast titans
0 a logo for the golden knights is painted on the beach.
*/
Q: What player was transferred from the team that has crossed
swords on its logo to the Warrington Wolves in the 2018 season?
Binder: SELECT player FROM w WHERE
f("Has crossed swords on its logo?"; ‘signed from‘) = ’yes’
In end-to-end QA setting, the prompt is almost the same, except the full table contents are used in all
the in-context examples to since in most cases QA must see the complete table to answer the question
correctly. We empirically ﬁnd that full table input to Codex is a necessity for end-to-end QA, but
only a small bonus for semantic parsing.
In the ablation study experiments, the prompt is also almost the same, except that under the very
large table scalability setting, we truncate number of table rows instead of in-context shots to ﬁt in
Codex max token limits, in order to simulate a realistic situation where only parts of the table can be
input into the model.
A.2 C ODEX HYPER -PARAMETERS
In both two phases of our Codex BINDER pipeline, parsing and execution, the Codex api is called.
We set the Codex in-context learning hyper-parameters as shown in Table 8.
17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Hyper-parameterParsing Execution
WIKITQ T ABFACT MMQA W IKITQ T ABFACT MMQA
temperature 0:4 0 :6 0 :4 0 :0 0 :0 0 :0
top_p 1:0 1 :0 1 :0 1 :0 1 :0 1 :0
max_output_tokens 512 512 512 1024 1024 1024
sampling_n 20 50 20 1 1 1
stop_tokens \n\n \n\n \n\n \n\n \n\n \n\n
num_shots 14 14 18 8 8 8
Table 8: Codex hyper-parameters we set in main experiments. Codex is used in two phases: Parsing
andExecution .
Parsing In parsing phase, i.e.parsing questions into programming languages, we annotate a
dozens or so examples from training set or modiﬁed examples from development set as in-context
demonstrations for each dataset. temperature is to control randomness of generations. We ﬁnd 0:4is
a suitable trade-off between ﬁdelity and diversity of generated programs in most cases. sampling _n
is number of generations (programs) per sample. We heuristically set sampling _nas20inWIKITQ
and MMQA to balance the time cost in execution and the potential performance gain over majority
voting. For TABFACT, we increase temperature to0:6and50, as we empirically ﬁnd that for binary
classiﬁcation tasks (or tasks with a small output space), more generations with more diversity can
better determine the ﬁnal answer.
Execution As mentioned in Section 2, the executor will call model(s) with various functionalities.
In experiments, we use Codex as the underlining model for all the neural modules since Codex itself
is a very powerful large language model which can realize most functions on texts and codes. For
images, they are preprocessed into text via image captioning by OFA (Wang et al., 2022). Note that
onMMQA , replacing Codex (with image captions) with a speciﬁc VQA model is likely to improve
the performance on images because image captioning is question-agnostic while VQA model can
predict the answer based on the question.
We let Codex output only one answer with temperature 0:0per input instead of multiple answers
followed by a majority vote considering the time cost. An interesting thing is that even when
temperature is0:0, the Codex outputs may be different in two inferences. OpenAI team said the
randomness inherent to GPU computations, and generally the outputs will be the consistent in most
cases, which is aligned with our observations.
We also ﬁnd it better to give Codex some in-context demonstrations for the neural module functionality.
50samples are annotated as a small retrieve pool (shared across datasets) for mapping a column
to a new one according to the question, i:e:,fmAPI in BINDER grammar. A simple BLEU score
retriever will retrieve 8similar items from the pool as in-context demonstrations for each coming
sample. Below are several examples demonstrating the formats of neural module functionality prompt.
The output (sub-)table contains a new mapped column named after the query, which will be further
merged into the original table. Note it is important to formulate the output also as a (sub-)table,
otherwise if Codex outputs a list of answers, it will be confused which row it is generating answer for
and perform very poorly.
## 1
Give a database as shown below:
Table: Highest mountain peaks of California
/*
row_id prominence
0 10080 ft; 3072 m
1 1677 ft; 511 m
2 7196 ft; 2193 m
3 2894 ft; 882 m
4 9832 ft; 2997 m
5 2563 ft; 781 m
*/
Q: Answer question "What is the value of in feet?" row by row.
QA map@ output:
18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
/*
row_id prominence What is the value of in feet?
0 10080 ft; 3072 m 10080
1 1677 ft; 511 m 1677
2 7196 ft; 2193 m 7196
3 2894 ft; 882 m 2894
4 9832 ft; 2997 m 9832
5 2563 ft; 781 m 2563
*/
## 2
Give a database as shown below:
Table: 2010-11 UAB Blazers men’s basketball team
/*
row_id hometown
0 chicago, il, u.s.
1 oklahoma city, ok, u.s.
2 montgomery, al, u.s.
3 greenville, ms, u.s.
4 birmingham, al, u.s.
*/
Q: Answer question "Is it from alabama?" row by row.
QA map@ output:
/*
row_id hometown Is it from alabama?
0 chicago, il, u.s. no
1 oklahoma city, ok, u.s. no
2 montgomery, al, u.s. yes
3 greenville, ms, u.s. no
4. birmingham, al, u.s. yes
*/
## 3
Give a database as shown below:
Table: 1963 International Gold Cup
/*
row_id driver
0 jim clark
1 richie ginther
2 graham hill
3 jack brabham
4 tony maggs
*/
Q: Answer question "What is his/her country?" row by row.
QA map@ output:
/*
row_id driver What is his/her country?
0 jim clark scotland
1 richie ginther united states
2 graham hill england
3 jack brabham australia
4 tony maggs south africa
*/
19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
A.3 M AJORITY VOTE STRATEGY
Majority vote is widely used to ensemble multiple candidate answers. A simple implementation of
majority vote is to select the answer that appears most often in candidates as the ﬁnal answer. For
example, given a candidate answer pool Cwithnanswers, the output answer aoutis derived by:
aout= arg max
a(count (a)); a2set(C) (1)
where count ()function counts the number of occurrences of the input answer in C, and set()
function de-duplicates the input list. In our case, nprograms are generated per sample, and their
execution results compose the candidate answer pool.
In experiments, we adopt two variants of majority vote strategies. The ﬁrst one we call answer-biased .
InTABFACT, we conjecture that it is difﬁcult to validate a statement of multiple sub-statements as
entailed (i.e., answer 1) with SQL program, since a minor error in program will cause the execution
to output refuted (i.e., answer 0). In other words, we value it when an answer 1occurs because it
indicates the statement has a high probability of being entailed . Thus, we re-weight answers by
assigning four votes for an answer 1, and one vote for an answer 0. The second is program-biased .
We assign larger weights to BINDER language when it occurs in the generated programs because
BINDER consists of small portion in few-shot prompt, and thus more generations will be in standard
programming language. Speciﬁcally, we re-weight BINDER program with ten votes, and the others
with one vote in W IKITQ and MMQA.
A.4 B INDER GRAMMAR ADAPTION TO SQL
QuestionWhich is the best-selling solid-color Shirt made in America?SQLSELECT Shirt FROM T WHERE f(Solid-Color?; Shirt) = ‘yes’AND f(North America?; Made_in) = ‘yes’ORDER BY Sales DESC LIMIT 1ASTProduction Rule ExtensionSQLSELECTFROMWHEREORDER BYShirtTANDLIMIT=yesf(Solid-Color?; Shirt)=f(North America?;Made_in)yesSalesDESC1Object Identifier  => Table | … | API ColumnAPI Column         => Column | fcol(Q; D)Function           => Aggregate | … | fval(Q; D)
Figure 4: An illustration of BINDER program AST and extension to SQL grammar. The blue types in
the production rule are extended by B INDER .
BINDER extends the production rules of the programming language to ensure the return values of
API calls can be compatible with its original grammar. Take SQL as an example, in Figure 4, two
APIsfcolandfvalare added as identiﬁers in the production rules to ﬁt in as a column and a value in
SQL. The AST of the shown BINDER program is quite similar to standard SQL’s AST, except that
API calls are placed in the column position.
A.5 E VALUATOR
Program executions are naturally more difﬁcult to match gold answers exactly when the answer is not
a span in the input knowledge source, while end-to-end models may match this pattern by ﬁnetuning
or infer phrases from the question. However, we ﬁnd that in WIKITQ, some error cases of program
execution outputs are correct according to humans. These cases mainly fall into two types. The ﬁrst
isA or B choice question, e.g.,, “Are there at least 13 different components on the chart?" in Table 9.
The SQL program SELECT COUNT(component) > 13 , returns 1to indicate “yes” and 0for
“no”. Generally in A or B problem, we match 1with Aand0with B. The second is number with unit
question, e.g.,, “what is the difference in years between constituency 1 and 2” in Table 9, where the
gold answer contains unit years in it, while it is almost impossible for programs to derive years , and 4
is also a reasonable correct answer in this case. Therefore, we add pre-matching logics upon WIKITQ
ofﬁcial evaluator for these two problems. Besides, we also normalize the dates with Recognizers
package in Python. Table 9 gives some examples to show the differences of three WIKITQevaluators.
For fair comparison, all previous baselines are re-evaluated with the semantic-match evaluator in
experiments.
20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Example EM (TaPEx string match) EM(WIKITQ ofﬁcial) EM(Semantic match)
(Normalization)
Question: What was the same problem that  X X
Bernard Collomb had as Innes Ireland?
Gold Answer: oil pressure
Pred Answer: oil pressure (56 laps)
(Float Precision)
Question: What is the difference between the  X X
qualifying time in 1967 and 1965?
Gold Answer: 7.45
Pred Answer: 7.449999999999989
(A or B Choice)
Question: Are there at least 13   X
different components on the chart?
Gold Answer: Yes
Pred Answer: 1
(Number with Units)
Question: What is the difference in years   X
between constiuency 1 and 2?
Gold Answer: 4 years
Pred Answer: 4
Table 9: Examples to illustrate differences among three exact match evaluators on WIKITQ. In
experiments, we evaluate all baselines and our method with semantic-match evaluator.
Figure 5: Comparison of the BINDER method(ours) with other large language model usage paradigms:
End-to-End, Chain-of-Thought, and Semantic Parsing/Code Generation.
BCOMPARISON WITH OTHER LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL USAGE PARADIGMS
Besides our work, some other works also focus on how to leverage large language models in creative
ways to achieve better performance on downstream tasks and see improvements with proper designs.
We compare our Binder method with the three previous paradigms of large language model usage:
End-End, Chain-of-Thought, and Semantic Parsing/Code Generation.
End-to-End End-to-End method (Brown et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022, i.a.) aims to use large
language models to generate ﬁnal answers directly, often done by providing a task description and/or
a few examples for in-context learning. Despite being effective enough to reach state-of-the-art or
comparable performance in a large number of benchmarks, it suffers from being uninterpretable and
lacking in robustness.
Chain-of-thought Chain-of-thought methods (Wei et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022a; Kojima
et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022, i.a.) improve the ability of large language models to perform
complex reasoning by generating a series of intermediate reasoning steps. While achieving great
success in various benchmarks, as a model-generated natural language, chain-of-thought suffers from
unreliability and uncontrollability.
21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Semantic Parsing/Code Generation Semantic Parsing/Code Generation methods (Chen et al.,
2021; Rajkumar et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022) aim to parse the question into a pre-deﬁned pro-
gram(SQL, Python, etc.), then execute it through the corresponding interpreter. It gains advantages
in interpretability and robustness compared with End-to-End and Chain-of-Thought methods, but
still suffers from the ﬁxed grammar of the pre-deﬁned programming language, making it inherently
limited in coverage (Shi et al., 2020b).
BINDER BINDER is a neural-symbolic paradigm that aims at mapping the question to a program
that allows binding a uniﬁed LM API for additional functionalities. This keeps the interpretability
and robustness of the semantic parsing method while unlocking the grammar’s limitations on its
coverage.
C M ORE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
C.1 R ESULTS OF MORE PREVIOUS SYSTEMS
Due to page limits, we didn’t list the complete previous systems in main results of WIKITQand
TABFACT. In this section, we present comparisons between more previous methods and ours, as
shown in Table 10 and Table 11.
Method Dev Test
Finetuned
Pasupat & Liang (2015) 37:0 37 :1
Neelakantan et al. (2015) 34:1 34 :2
Zhang et al. (2017) 40:6 43 :7
Liang et al. (2018) 42:7 43 :8
Dasigi et al. (2019) 43:1 44 :3
Agarwal et al. (2019) 43:2 44 :1
Wang et al. (2019) 43:7 44 :5
Herzig et al. (2020) - 48:8
Xie et al. (2022){51:9 50 :6
Yin et al. (2020) 53:0 52 :3
Yu et al. (2020) 51:9 52 :7
Guo et al. (2021) 53:6 52 :3
Liu et al. (2021){60:4 59 :1
Zhou et al. (2022){61:1 61 :3
Jiang et al. (2022){- 63:3
Without Finetuning
Codex end-to-end QA{50:5 48 :7
Codex SQL{y60:2 61 :1
Codex B INDERy(Ours) 65.3 65.2
Table 10: WIKITQexecution accuracy of more
previous systems. {means the result has been
re-evaluated by the semantic-match evaluator in
Table 9.ymeans symbolic method that outputs
intermediate languages.Method Small Test
Finetuned
Chen et al. (2019a)y68:1
Zhong et al. (2020)y74:3
Shi et al. (2020a)y74:2
Yang et al. (2020)y76:2
Ou & Liu (2022)y77:0
Liu et al. (2021) (BART-Large) 82:5
Eisenschlos et al. (2020) 83:9
Xie et al. (2022) 85:4
Liu et al. (2021) (Tapex) 85.9
Without Finetuning
Codex end-to-end QA 72:6
Codex SQLy80:7
Codex B INDERy(Ours) 85.1
with few-shot retriever 86.0
Table 11: TABFACT accuracy on small test set of
more previous systems. ymeans symbolic method
that outputs intermediate languages.
C.2 R ESULTS WITH WIKITQ O FFICIAL EVALUATORS
We list BINDER performance evaluated under WIKITQofﬁcial evaluator in Table 12. As shown,
there exist performance drops compared with semantic-match evaluator. The symbolic methods with
SQL and BINDER see larger drops (about 2:5%) than end-to-end methods (about 1%) because the A
or B choice questions and number with units answers (illustrated in Table 9) are judged as incorrect.
C.3 A BLATION STUDY OF #MAJORITY VOTE CANDIDATES
In this section, we give an empirical study of how number of generations ( i.e., candidate BINDER
programs) affects majority voting performance. As shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7, increasing the
22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Method Dev Test
Finetuned
T5-3B (Xie et al., 2022) 51:6 50 :3
Tapex (Liu et al., 2021) 60:1 58 :5
TaCube (Zhou et al., 2022) 60:9 60 :8
OmniTab (Jiang et al., 2022) - 62.9
Without Finetuning
Codex end-to-end QA 49:3 47 :6
Codex SQLy57:6 55 :1
Codex B INDERy(Ours) 62.6 61.9
Table 12: WIKITQexecution accuracy using its ofﬁcial evaluator, with a normalizer to recognize
date.
#candidates of majority vote effectively improves the performance on WIKITQandTABFACT. Em-
pirically, TABFACT requires more candidates to determine entailed orrefuted . We haven’t conducted
experiments on WIKITQwith more than 20candidate programs now, which may potentially lift the
current best performance a bit.
5960616263646566
15101520
Figure 6: WIKITQexecution accuracy on dev
set with different numbers of generations (x-axis)
used in majority vote.
81828384858687
15102030405060Figure 7: TABFACT execution accuracy on small
test set with different numbers of generations (x-
axis) used in majority vote.
C.4 W IKITQ SQL U NSOLVABLE PROPORTION BY OURSTATISTICS
In Table 3, the decomposition of execution accuracy on WIKITQdevelopment set, we can see the
BINDER method also gain advantage on Program-solvable subset (and pure SQL method still able
to have a certain performance on Program-unsolvable part). It is surprisingly since this part could
already be solved by SQL (according to notation from SQUALL dataset), and thus our approach
does not theoretically improve the performance of this part. Further, we found this is because in
SQUALL , authors normalized part of the table before doing the SQL annotation, and they also
missed some samples that could be solved after normalizing the table. In turn, there is a signiﬁcant
portion of the data marked by SQUALL , and when we use the original table rather than the table
modiﬁed by the authors, we ﬁnd that it belongs to the part that cannot be resolved by the program, so
thatBINDER could gain some advantage on it. The same is true for the part that is not marked by
SQUALL . We re-executed the SQL annotation of the SQUALL dataset on the tables we normalized
for each sample, check and re-judged whether the sample was a Program-solvable sample by whether
the execution result matched the previous one, and obtained the new split of 1251 ( 44:19%) and 1580
(55:81%) for Program-unsolvable and Program-solvable set, respectively.(Previous split according
toSQUALL is of 625 ( 22:08%) and 2206 ( 77:92%) examples. This reduces table content noise by
artiﬁcially cleaning the table, but also underestimates the challenges posed by in-the-wild data.) The
new split will be released in our code for future more ﬁne-grained analysis or exploration.
23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Select a programming languageAnnotate Binder programs (a dozen or so is enough)Generate Binder programs with CodexApply the underlying models to the neural modules(a LLM may be enough)Execute Binder programsGood performanceInterpretabilityScalability(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)AutomatedHuman labor
Figure 8: A pipeline to extend B INDER to a new domain.
D P IPELINE TO EXTEND BINDER
In this section, we introduce a pipeline with Codex to extend BINDER to a new domain with new the
programming language and neural modules. Figure 8 illustrates the pipeline:
(1)A programming language is selected as the intermediate representation according to the
domain. For example, SQL ﬁts table domain, SPARQL, Cypher ﬁt knowledge graph domain,
and general-purpose languages like Python, Lisp, and Java are more likely to be adapted to
various domains.
(2)Before parsing the text into BINDER programs, in-context examples are required to help
Codex learn this task and the grammar adaption (inserted neural modules) from the original
language. Empirically, since Codex has been heavily pretrained on code, a dozen of BINDER
program annotations are enough. Besides, annotating a pool of more examples ( e.g.,100)
and retrieving in-context examples for each inference sample has been proved to be a
effective way to improve parsing accuracy, as we applied in T ABFACT.
(3)Generate the BINDER programs with Codex given the in-context examples and the inference
query. Codex hyper-parameters can be adjusted based on the task.
(4)Bind models with the neural module functionalities in BINDER program. In this paper,
we set Codex as the only underlying model for all functionalities like commonsense QA,
information extraction because large language models (LLM) are powerful and easy-to-use.
If a single LLM is not enough to realize the required functionalities, e.g., VQA, bind the
API with a specialized VQA model given the inputs are images.
(5)Execute the BINDER programs with the deterministic language executor and neural models.
E E RROR ANALYSIS
E.1 E RROR TYPES
We divide the error type into:
(1)Syntax error : prediction not satisﬁed with the syntax of B INDER program.
(2)Semantic error :
•Column : choose the wrong column, or miss the restriction from certain column.
•Value : use the wrong value, or obfuscate the fuzzy match with the exact match.
•Operator : use wrong operator or miss the restriction of operators.
•Structure : The query produced an overall structural error. Either the overall meaning of the
query is misinterpreted; or the query only considers the question and is not applicable to
this table at all.
•BINDER usage : missing the usage of BINDER when needed, or the command inside the
BINDER cell is improper or ambiguous to execute.
(3)Incorrect execution : The predicted program is correct, but the ﬁnal result are wrong
because some wrong mid-term answers are predicted in the execution process(error in
information extraction, error in handling the corner cases value etc.).
(4)False negative : the annotation of the gold answer is wrong; or the prediction is actually
right while the executor misjudges it as wrong due to limited ability.
24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
row_id year site winning team losing team series
0 1902 lawrence kansas 16 kansas state 0 ku 1–0
1 1903 lawrence kansas 34 kansas state 0 ku 2–0
2 1904 manhattan kansas 41 kansas state 4 ku 3–0
3 1905 lawrence kansas 28 kansas state 0 ku 4–0
4 1906 manhattan kansas state 6 kansas 4 ku 4–1
5 1907 lawrence kansas 29 kansas state 10 ku 5–1
...
21 1924 manhattan kansas state 6 kansas 0 ku 17–2–3
22 1925 lawrence kansas state 14 kansas 7 ku 17–3–3
23 1926 manhattan kansas state 27 kansas 0 ku 17–4–3
24 1927 lawrence kansas state 13 kansas 2 ku 17–5–3
25 1928 manhattan kansas 7 kansas state 0 ku 18–5–3
...
Table 13: The table of WIKITQnt-1239 with title "Kansas–Kansas State football rivalry". We use
it for demonstration of interpretibility. Removed rows unimportant to get the answer. The query is
When was the ﬁrst game that kansas state won by double digits? and the gold answer is 1926 .
E.2 E RROR EXAMPLE
The context(table, query, answer) of W IKITQ nt-1239 is shown in Table 13.
F A NNOTATION INTERFACE
We build an annotation interface allowing real-time executions with huggingface spaces4. Currently,
SQL and BINDER with SQL are supported. We will release the source code which hopefully may
beneﬁt annotations of tasks requiring symbolic languages in the community, e.g., semantic parsing
and code generation. Figure 9 and 10 demonstrate our interface.
4https://huggingface.co/spaces
25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Figure 9: An example from W IKITQ annotation interface.
26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Figure 10: An example from T ABFACT annotation interface.
27