Title: Think you have Solved Question Answering? Try ARC, the AI2 Reasoning Challenge

Think you have Solved Question Answering?
Try ARC, the AI2 Reasoning Challenge
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot,
Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, Oyvind Tafjord
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, U.S.A.
fpeterc,isaacc,orene,tushark,ashishs,carissas,oyvindt g@allenai.org
Abstract
We present a new question set, text corpus, and baselines
assembled to encourage AI research in advanced question
answering. Together, these constitute the AI2 Reasoning
Challenge (ARC), which requires far more powerful knowl-
edge and reasoning than previous challenges such as SQuAD
or SNLI. The ARC question set is partitioned into a Chal-
lenge Set and an Easy Set, where the Challenge Set contains
only questions answered incorrectly by both a retrieval-based
algorithm and a word co-occurence algorithm. The dataset
contains only natural, grade-school science questions (au-
thored for human tests), and is the largest public-domain set
of this kind (7,787 questions). We test several baselines on
the Challenge Set, including leading neural models from the
SQuAD and SNLI tasks, and ﬁnd that none are able to signif-
icantly outperform a random baseline, reﬂecting the difﬁcult
nature of this task. We are also releasing the ARC Corpus, a
corpus of 14M science sentences relevant to the task, and im-
plementations of the three neural baseline models tested. Can
your model perform better? We pose ARC as a challenge to
the community.
Introduction
Datasets are increasingly driving progress in AI, resulting
in impressive solutions to several question-answering (QA)
tasks (e.g., Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Joshi et al., 2017). How-
ever, many of these datasets focused on retrieval-style tasks,
where surface-level cues alone were usually sufﬁcient to
identify an answer. This has not encouraged progress on
questions requiring reasoning, use of commonsense knowl-
edge, or other advanced methods for deeper text comprehen-
sion. The challenge presented here, called ARC (AI2 Rea-
soning Challenge), aims to address this limitation by posing
questions that are hard to answer with simple baselines.
The ARC Dataset consists of a collection of 7787 nat-
ural science questions , namely questions authored for use
on standardized tests. Standardized tests have previously
been proposed as a Grand Challenge for AI (Brachman,
2005; Clark and Etzioni, 2016) as they involve a wide va-
riety of linguistic and inferential phenomena, have varying
levels of difﬁculty, and are measurable, motivating, and am-
bitious. However, making this challenge a reality is difﬁ-
cult, as such questions are difﬁcult obtain (most examina-
tion boards release only limited practice tests to the public).For ARC we have addressed this through several months of
extensive search and investigation.
In addition, to encourage focus on advanced phenomena,
we have partitioned ARC into a Challenge Set (2590 ques-
tions), containing questions answered incorrectly by both
a retrieval-based algorithm and a word co-occurrence algo-
rithm, and an Easy Set (5197 questions), containing the re-
mainder. For example, two typical challenge questions are:
Which property of a mineral can be determined just by
looking at it? (A) luster [correct] (B) mass (C) weight
(D) hardness
A student riding a bicycle observes that it moves
faster on a smooth road than on a rough road. This
happens because the smooth road has (A) less gravity
(B) more gravity (C) less friction [correct] (D) more
friction
Both these questions are difﬁcult to answer via simple re-
trieval or word correlation. For example, there are no Web
sentences of the form “luster can be determined by look-
ing at something”; similarly, “mineral” is strongly corre-
lated with “hardness” (an incorrect answer option). Rather,
they require more advanced QA methods. We provide more
example questions, and a catagorization of the knowledge
and reasoning types that the questions appeal to, in Tables 4
and 5.
To help the community to engage with this dataset, we are
also releasing a science text corpus and two baseline neural
models as part of the ARC challenge:
1. The ARC Corpus, containing 14M science-related sen-
tences with knowledge relevant to ARC. A sampled anal-
ysis suggests the corpus mentions knowledge relevant to
95% of the Challenge questions. (Use of the Corpus for
the Challenge is optional).
2. Three neural baseline models, DecompAttn, BiDAF, and
DGEM, for QA. These are multiple-choice QA adapta-
tions of three neural models: the decomposable attention
model (Parikh et al., 2016), a top performer on SNLI;
Bidirectional Attention Flow (Seo et al., 2017b), a top per-
former on SQuAD; and the decomposed graph entailment
model, a top performer on SciTail (Khot et al., 2018).
While these score well on the Easy Set, they are unablearXiv:1803.05457v1  [cs.AI]  14 Mar 2018
to perform signiﬁcantly better than a random baseline on
the Challenge Set, illustrating its challenging nature.
This challenge differs from the Kaggle-hosted 2016 Allen
AI Science Challenge (Schoenick et al., 2017) in three im-
portant ways1. First, the creation of a Challenge partition is
to avoid scores being dominated by the performance of sim-
ple algorithms, and thus encourage research on methods that
the more difﬁcult questions demand. Second, we provide a
science corpus along with the questions to help get started
(use of the corpus is optional, and systems are not restricted
to this corpus). Finally, the questions, corpus, and models
are all publically available.
The paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst discuss re-
lated work, and then describe how the ARC dataset was
collected and partitioned. We also provide an analysis of the
types of problems present in the Challenge Set. We then de-
scribe the supporting ARC Corpus, and illustrate how it con-
tains knowledge relevant to Challenge questions. Finally, we
describe several baselines and their performance on ARC.
Most notably, although some baseline algorithms perform
well on the Easy Set (scoring up to 61%), none are able to
perform signiﬁcantly above random on the Challenge Set.
We conclude by posing ARC as a challenge to the commu-
nity. The ARC Dataset, Corpus, Models, and Leaderboard
can be accessed at http://data.allenai.org/arc.
Related Work
There are numerous datasets available to drive progress
in question-answering. Earlier reading comprehension
datasets, e.g., MCTest (Richardson, 2013), SQuAD (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016), NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2016), and
CNN/DailyMail (Hermann et al., 2015), contained ques-
tions whose answers could be determined from surface-level
cues alone (i.e., answers were “explicitly stated”). TriviaQA
(Joshi et al., 2017) broadened this task by providing sev-
eral articles with a question, and used questions authored
independently of the articles. Again, though, the questions
were largely factoid-style, e.g., “Who won the Nobel Peace
Prize in 2009?”. Although systems can now perform well
on these datasets, even matching human performance (Si-
monite, 2018), they can be easily fooled (Jia and Liang,
2017); the degree to which they truly understand language
or domain-speciﬁc concepts remains unclear.
To push towards more complex QA tasks, one approach
has been to generate synthetic datasets, the most notable ex-
ample being the bAbI dataset (Weston et al., 2015). bAbi
was generated using a simple world simulator and language
generator, producing data for 20 different tasks. It has stim-
ulated work on use of memory network neural architectures
(Weston et al., 2014), supporting a form of multistep rea-
soning where a neural memory propagates information from
one step to another (e.g. Henaff et al., 2016; Seo et al.,
2017a). However, its use of synthetic text and a synthetic
world limits the realism and difﬁculty of the task, with many
systems scoring a perfect 100% on most tasks (e.g. Weston
1ARC includes the publically releasable subset of the Kaggle
questions (about 60% of the Kaggle set, making up 43% of the
ARC set).et al., 2014). In general, a risk of using large synthetic QA
datasets is that neural methods are remarkably powerful at
“reverse-engineering” the process by which a dataset was
generated, or picking up on its idiosyncrasies to excel at
it, without necessarily advancing language understanding or
reasoning.
More recently, Welbl et al. (2017b) created the WikiHop
dataset, containing questions that appear to require more
than one Wikipedia document to answer (“multihop ques-
tions”). The dataset takes a step towards a more challeng-
ing task, but has several limitations: questions are binary
predicates (e.g., date ofbirth(“jeanne c. stein”,?X)); the in-
tended inference is typically a simple two-step chain (com-
monly a geographical substitution of a city for a country);
and in many cases the correct answer can be guessed from
the passage, without requiring multi-hop inference ( 44%
of the answerable questions are single-hop, according to the
authors (Welbl et al., 2017b)).
Datasets based on human standardized tests have also
been used in AI for several years (e.g. Clark et al., 2016;
Seo et al., 2014; Fujita et al., 2014; Strickland, 2013), and
as part of the NTCIR QALab (NII, 2017), and for the 2016
Allen AI Science Challenge described in the Introduction
(Schoenick et al., 2017). However, there are two poten-
tially signiﬁcant challenges with these datasets. First, these
datasets are often small (e.g., hundreds of questions), due
to the scarcity of public, real-world test data. Second, be-
cause tests were designed for people rather than machines,
large portions of these tests can be easily solved by simple
AI methods (e.g. Davis, 2016; Clark et al., 2016). The result
of this is that scores become dominated by the performance
of simple algorithms (information retrieval, statistical cor-
relations). This then biases research towards incrementally
improving those algorithms, rather than exploring the larger
AI challenges that the more difﬁcult questions demand. In-
deed, it is easy to mistake progress on these datasets as im-
plying equal progress on easy and hard questions, while in
reality progress may be heavily concentrated on easy ques-
tions alone (Gururangan et al., 2018), leaving more difﬁcult
challenges unaddressed. The ARC Dataset addresses both
of these limitations.
The ARC Dataset
The ARC dataset consists of 7787 science questions, all
non-diagram, multiple choice (typically 4-way multiple
choice). They are drawn from a variety of sources, and
sorted into a Challenge Set of 2590 “hard” questions (those
that both a retrieval and a co-occurrence method fail to an-
swer correctly) and an Easy Set of 5197 questions. Table 1
summarizes the sizes of the train/dev/test partitions in the
ARC dataset. The question vocabulary uses 6329 distinct
words (stemmed).
Questions vary in their target student grade level (as as-
signed by the examiners who authored the questions), rang-
ing from 3rd grade to 9th, i.e., students typically of age 8
through 13 years. Table 2 shows a break-down of the set
based on grade level with absolute counts(#) and percent-
age(%) of the Challenge and Easy set. In practice, there
is substantial overlap in difﬁculty among grade levels (also
2
Challenge Easy Total
Train 1119 2251 3370
Dev 299 570 869
Test 1172 2376 3548
TOTAL 2590 5197 7787
Table 1: Number of questions in the ARC partitions.
Grade Challenge Easy
% (# qns) % (# qns)
3 3.6 (94 qns) 3.4 (176 qns)
4 9 (233) 11.4 (591)
5 19.5 (506) 21.2 (1101)
6 3.2 (84) 3.4 (179)
7 14.4 (372) 10.7 (557)
8 41.4 (1072) 41.2 (2139)
9 8.8 (229) 8.7 (454)
Table 2: Grade-level distribution of ARC questions
seen in the similar distribution of grade levels), as each grade
level contains a mixture of easy and difﬁcult questions.
min / average / max
Property: Challenge Easy
Question (# words) 2 / 22.3 / 128 3 / 19.4 / 118
Question (# sentences) 1 / 1.8 / 11 1 / 1.6 / 9
Answer option (# words) 1 / 4.9 / 39 1 / 3.7 / 26
# answer options 3 / 4.0 / 5 3 / 4.0 / 5
Table 3: Properties of the ARC Dataset
Summary statistics of ARC are provided in Table 3,
showing questions and answers vary considerably in length.
Finally, Table 7 in the Appendix lists the variety of sources
the questions were drawn from.
Identifying Challenge Questions
Operationally, we deﬁne a Challenge question as one that
is answered incorrectly by both of two baseline solvers, de-
scribed below. Although this only approximates the infor-
mal goal of it being a “hard” question, this deﬁnition never-
theless serves as a practical and useful ﬁlter, as reﬂected by
the low scores of various baselines on the Challenge Set.
Information Retrieval (IR) Solver. The ﬁrst ﬁlter we ap-
ply is the IR solver from Clark et al. (2016), brieﬂy described
here for completeness. The IR solver uses the Waterloo cor-
pus from (Clark et al., 2016), a Web-based corpus of 51010
tokens (280GB). The solver searches to see if the question
qalong with an answer option is explicitly stated in the cor-
pus, and returns the conﬁdence that such a statement was
found. To do this, for each answer option ai, it sends q+ai
as a query to a search engine (we use Elasticsearch), and re-
turns the search engine’s score for the top retrieved sentence
swhere salso has at least one non-stopword overlap with q,
and at least one with ai; this ensures shassome relevance
to both qandai. This is repeated for all options aito score
them all, and the option with the highest score selected.The Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) Solver. The
second ﬁlter we apply is the PMI solver, also from Clark
et al. (2016), again described here for completeness. This
uses the same corpus as the IR solver, and formalizes a way
of computing and applying associational knowledge. Given
a question qand an answer option ai, it uses PMI or point-
wise mutual information (Church and Hanks, 1989) to mea-
sure the strength of the associations between parts of qand
parts of ai. Given a large corpus C, the PMI for two n-grams
xandyis deﬁned as
PMI( x; y) = logp(x; y)
p(x)p(y)
Here p(x; y)is the joint probability that xandyoccur to-
gether in C, within a certain window of text (we use a 10
word window). The term p(x)p(y), on the other hand, rep-
resents the probability with which xandywould occur to-
gether if they were statistically independent. The ratio of
p(x; y)top(x)p(y)is thus the ratio of the observed co-
occurrence to the expected co-occurrence. The larger this
ratio, the stronger the association between xandy.
The solver extracts unigrams, bigrams, trigrams, and skip-
bigrams from the question qand each answer option ai.
It outputs the answer with the largest average PMI, calcu-
lated over all pairs of question n-grams and answer option
n-grams.
The Challenge Set
To illustrate the impact of using these algorithms as ﬁlters
when deﬁning the Challenge Set, consider the following ex-
ample:
Which property of air does a barometer measure? (A)
speed (B) pressure [correct] (C) humidity (D) tempera-
ture
The question was excluded from the Challenge Set because
it is correctly answered by (here) both the IR and PMI algo-
rithms (note that it would have been excluded even if it was
answered correctly by just one of the solvers). The IR algo-
rithm ﬁnds multiple sentences supporting the correct answer,
e.g.,
Air pressure is measured with a barometer.
Air pressure will be measured with a barometer.
The aneroid barometer is an instrument that does not use
liquid in measuring the pressure of the air.
A barometer measures the pressure of air molecules.
and similarly the PMI algorithm ﬁnds that “barometer” and
“pressure” (and also “air” and “pressure”) co-occur unusu-
ally frequently (high PMI) in its corpus.
In contrast, consider the following question:
Which property of a mineral can be determined just by
looking at it? (A) luster [correct] (B) mass (C) weight
(D) hardness
This is incorrectly answered by both algorithms: There are
no corpus sentences similar to “a material’s luster can be
determined by looking at it”. Similarly, “mineral” co-occurs
unusually frequently with several incorrect answer options
3
Knowledge Type Example
Deﬁnition What is a worldwide increase in temperature called? (A) greenhouse effect (B) global
warming (C) ozone depletion (D) solar heating
Basic Facts &
PropertiesWhich element makes up most of the air we breathe? (A) carbon (B) nitrogen (C) oxygen
(D) argon
Structure The crust, the mantle, and the core are structures of Earth. Which description is a feature
of Earth’s mantle? (A) contains fossil remains (B) consists of tectonic plates (C) is located
at the center of Earth (D) has properties of both liquids and solids
Processes & Causal What is the ﬁrst step of the process in the formation of sedimentary rocks? (A) erosion (B)
deposition (C) compaction (D) cementation
Teleology / Purpose What is the main function of the circulatory system? (1) secrete enzymes (2) digest proteins
(3) produce hormones (4) transport materials
Algebraic If a red ﬂowered plant (RR) is crossed with a white ﬂowered plant (rr), what color will the
offspring be? (A) 100% pink (B) 100% red (C) 50% white, 50% red (D) 100% white
Experiments Scientists perform experiments to test hypotheses. How do scientists try to remain ob-
jective during experiments? (A) Scientists analyze all results. (B) Scientists use safety
precautions. (C) Scientists conduct experiments once. (D) Scientists change at least two
variables.
Spatial / Kinematic In studying layers of rock sediment, a geologist found an area where older rock was layered
on top of younger rock. Which best explains how this occurred? (A) Earthquake activity
folded the rock layers...
Table 4: Types of knowledge suggested by ARC Challenge Set questions
(e.g., mass, hardness), confusing the PMI algorithm. This
question is thus part of the Challenge Set, as it appears to
require a more advanced answering method.
Question Types
ARC questions appeal to both different styles of knowl-
edge, and different styles of reasoning. In Tables 4 and 5,
we enumerate the broad classes of each that we observe in
the ARC challenge, based on a sample of 100 questions.
The relative sizes of these categories are shown in Figures 1
and 2. These sizes are necessarily approximate, as it requires
a subjective judgement about the main challenge exhibited
by different questions. Nevertheless, it helps to provide a
rough atlas of the knowledge and reasoning space underly-
ing ARC.
The ARC Corpus
In addition to the ARC question set, we are also releasing
the ARC Corpus, a large corpus of science-related sentences
mined from the Web. It contains 14M sentences (1.4GB of
text), and mentions much of the knowledge required to an-
swer the Challenge Questions. Although some of these men-
tions are indirect, and exploiting them is not trivial, it never-
theless provides a starting point for attacking the ARC Chal-
lenge. Note that use of the corpus is optional, and also that
systems are not restricted to this corpus.
The ARC Corpus was created by utilizing a major search
engine to run a large series of search queries relevant to
Figure 1: Relative sizes of different knowledge types sug-
gested by the ARC Challenge Set.
science. Queries were automatically constructed by instan-
tiating100 hand-written templates for 80 science topics
covered by US elementary and middle schools, the subject
areas of ARC. For example, for the topic “celestial phe-
nomena”, two templates “[ astronomical-term ] astronomy”
and “[ astronomical-term ] astrophysics” were authored, and
a list of (here, 360) terms for astronomical-term collected
and used, resulting in 720 queries. The top several docu-
ments from each search were collected and de-duplicated,
and then the content of these documents was stripped down
4
Reasoning Type Example
Question logic Which item below is notmade from a material grown in nature? (A) a cotton shirt (B) a
wooden chair (C) a plastic spoon (D) a grass basket
Linguistic
MatchingWhich of the following best describes a mineral? (A) the main nutrient in all foods (B) a
type of grain found in cereals (C) a natural substance that makes up rocks (D) the decom-
posed plant matter found in soil
Multihop
ReasoningWhich property of a mineral can be determined just by looking at it? (A) luster (B) mass
(C) weight (D) hardness
Comparison Compared to the Sun, a red star most likely has a greater (A) volume. (B) rate of rotation.
(C) surface temperature. (D) number of orbiting planets
Algebraic If a heterozygous smooth pea plant (Ss) is crossed with a homozygous smooth pea plant
(SS), which are the possible genotypes the offspring could have? (A) only SS (B) only Ss
(C) Ss or SS (D) ss or SS
Hypothetical /
CounterfactualIf the Sun were larger, what would most likely also have to be true for Earth to sustain life?
(A) Earth would have to be further from the Sun. (B) Earth would have to be closer to the
Sun. (C) Earth would have to be smaller. (D) Earth would have to be larger.
Explanation /
Meta-reasoningWhy can steam be used to cook food? (A) Steam does work on objects. (B) Steam is a
form of water. (C) Steam can transfer heat to cooler objects. (D) Steam is able to move
through small spaces.
Spatial / Kinematic Where will a sidewalk feel hottest on a warm, clear day? (A) Under a picnic table (B) In
direct sunlight (C) Under a puddle (D) In the shade
Analogy Inside cells, special molecules carry messages from the membrane to the nucleus. Which
body system uses a similar process? (A) endocrine system (B) lymphatic system (C) ex-
cretory system (D) integumentary system
Table 5: Types of reasoning suggested by ARC Challenge Set questions
Figure 2: Relative sizes of different reasoning types sug-
gested by the ARC Challenge Set.
to capture just the text in each document. The resulting text
was then chunked into sentences. This was repeated for all
templates. Note that some templates were parameterized by
more than one parameter. From an informal analysis of a
random sample of 805 documents that were collected, ap-
proximately 75% were judged as “science relevant”. Thecorpus was then augmented with the AristoMini corpus2, an
earlier corpus containing dictionary deﬁnitions from Wik-
tionary, articles from Simple Wikipedia tagged as science,
and additional science sentences collected from the Web.
From a vocabulary analysis, 99.8% of the ARC question
vocabulary is mentioned in the ARC Corpus3.
In our baseline experiments discussed shortly, we ﬁnd that
if we change the corpus behind the IR solver from Waterloo
to the ARC Corpus, this changes its Challenge Set score
from near zero (by deﬁnition, Challenge questions are those
that IR with the Waterloo corpus gets wrong) to a score sim-
ilar to random guessing4. However, from an informal, sam-
pled analysis, we ﬁnd that this is more a limitation of the IR
methodology than of the coverage of the ARC Corpus. The
ARC Corpus, in fact, appears to mention knowledge rele-
vant to approximately 95% of the ARC Challenge questions
(from an analysis of a random sample of questions), even if
simple retrieval methods are not able to exploit it to correctly
2Also available separately at http://allenai.org/data.html
3Only 11 question words, mainly proper nouns, do not appear
in the corpus: Daphne, Sooj, LaKeisha, Quickgrow, Hypergrow,
CCGCAT, nonsnow, Quickgrow, Coaccretion, HZn, MgBr
4In fact slightly lower than random guessing, likely due to
some corpus similarities where the same distractors in Waterloo
were also present in theARC Corpus.
5
answer the questions. For example, consider:
Scientists launch a rocket into space for a mission.
Once the rocket escapes the gravitational pull of Earth,
how will the mass and weight of the rocket be affected?
(A) The mass and weight will change.
(B) The mass and weight will stay the same.
(C) The mass will stay the same, but the weight will
change. [correct]
(D) The mass will change, but the weight will stay the
same.
While this particular scenario is of course not mentioned
explicitly in the ARC Corpus, there are several statements
about the relation between mass, weight, and gravity, for ex-
ample:
The main difference is that if you were to leave the Earth
and go to the Moon, your weight would change but your
mass would remain constant.
Astronauts in orbit experience weightlessness just like ob-
jects in the falling aircraft.
Weight is the force that something feels due to gravity:
so the brick would have a much larger weight near the
earth’s surface than it does in deep space.
Such sentences provide evidence that weight but not mass
will change when in space. Similarly, consider the question:
Which factor will prompt an animal’s ﬁght-or-ﬂight re-
sponse? (A) population size (B) competition for food
[correct] (C) seasonal temperatures (D) protection of
the environment
While there are few sentences in the ARC Corpus that di-
rectly relate ﬁght-or-ﬂight with food competition, there are
several that indicate competition is a kind of threat, e.g.,:
Insurgency, cross-border ﬁring, competition with live-
stock for grazing ground, ...all threaten the Markhor.
The main threats to the species include loss of habitat
through deforestation, hunting for meat and competition
with domestic livestock.
Habitat fragmentation threatens this species, as does pos-
sible competition with the introduced non-native Ring-
necked Pheasant.
and similarly that threats can trigger the ﬁght-or-ﬂight re-
sponse:
Whenever a reptile faces a threat they go into ﬁght or
ﬂight mode ...
The sympathetics command your ﬁght or ﬂight response ,
and when they ﬁre, your heart rate and your breathing
speed up, ...preparing your body to face a threat ...
Finally, consider the question:
Which of the following distinguishes the organisms in
the kingdom Fungi from other eukaryotic organisms?
(A) Fungi are unicellular. (B) Fungi reproduce sexu-
ally. (C) Fungi obtain nutrients by absorption. [cor-
rect] (D) Fungi make food through photosynthesis
Again, there is distributed evidence for the answer, including
that (A) is incorrect:
There are unicellular fungi and multicellular fungi.that (C) is possible:
Fungi are heterotrophs that acquire their nutrients by ab-
sorption.
and that (C) is distinct for other eukaryotic organisms:
Animals are multicellular eukaryotes; they are chemosyn-
thetic heterotrophs that ingest their food.
Although these descriptions of reasoning paths are infor-
mal, and clearly many others are possible, they illustrate that
the ARC Corpus mentions knowledge relevant to a ques-
tion, even if no single sentence alone provides the answer.
Of course, this does not address the challenge of correctly
identifying and reasoning with this knowledge, nor the chal-
lenge of injecting unstated commonsense knowledge that
may also be required. Rather, our claim is that the Corpus
contains substantial linguistic signal relevant to most of the
ARC questions, and is a useful starting point for corpus-
based attacks on the Challenge.
Baseline Performance
Baseline Systems
We ran several baseline QA systems on the Challenge and
Easy Sets, including two neural models, DecompAttn and
BiDAF (details below), that have near state-of-the-art per-
formance on the well-known SNLI and SQuAD datasets re-
spectively. We scored systems using the following scoring
rubric: For each question, a system receives 1 point if it
chooses the correct answer and 1=kif it reports a k-way tie
(i.e., chooses multiple answers) that includes the correct an-
swer. For a question set, the overall score of the system is
the sum of the points it receives for all questions, divided by
the number of questions and reported as a percentage. We
report performance of the following systems:
1.IR (dataset deﬁnition). IR method, described earlier.
2.PMI (dataset deﬁnition). PMI method, described earlier.
3.Guess-all (“random”). A na ¨ıve baseline that selects all
answer options as equally valid, thereby scoring 1=kfor
each question with kanswer choices. A system that
chooses a single answer at random will also converge to
this score after enough trials.
4.IR (ARC Corpus). The IR algorithm, rerun with the
ARC Corpus. Note that changing the original corpus is
expected to result in a different score, unless the two cor-
pora are highly correlated. A corpus containing random
strings, for instance, will have very low correlation with
the original corpus and will result in a random-guessing
score of around 25%.
5.TableILP (Khashabi et al., 2016), which performs match-
ing and reasoning using a semi-structured knowledge base
of science knowledge, expressed in tables.
6.TupleInference (Khot et al., 2017), which performs semi-
structured matching of the question with retrieved sen-
tences, where the structure consists of Open IE tuples.
7.DecompAttn, DGEM, and DGEM-OpenIE (Neural En-
tailment Models). We adapted two neural entailment
6
models, DecompAttn (Parikh et al., 2016) and DGEM
(Khot et al., 2018), to the task of answering multiple-
choice questions. The models were trained on an ex-
tended version of the SciTail dataset (Khot et al., 2018).
To adapt these to multiple-choice QA, we ﬁrst convert
the question qplus an answer option aiinto a hypothe-
sis sentence (or paragraph) hi, use this as a search query
to retrieve text sentences tijfrom a corpus, then compute
the entailment scores between hiand each tij. This is
repeated for all answer options, and the option with the
overall highest entailment score selected. Further details
are given in the Appendix.
The DGEM model uses a structured representation of the
hypothesis hi, extracted with a proprietary parser plus
Open IE. To create a releasable version of DGEM, we also
evaluate (and release) a variant DGEM-OpenIE, a version
of DGEM that only uses Open IE to create the structured
representation of hi, thus avoiding proprietary tools.
8.BiDAF (Reading Comprehension Model). We also
adapted BiDAF (Seo et al., 2017b), a top-performer on
the SQuAD dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), to our task.
As BiDAF is a direct answer system, we adapted it to
multiple-choice QA following the approach used in sev-
eral previous projects (Khashabi et al., 2018b; Welbl et al.,
2017a; Kembhavi et al., 2017) as follows: First, given a
question, we create a single paragraph by concatenating a
set of retrieved sentences. In this case, we use the same
sentences retrieved by the entailment models for all an-
swer options (above). We then use BiDAF to select an
answer span from this paragraph, given the question. Fi-
nally, we pick the multiple-choice option that maximally
overlaps that answer span (here deﬁned as the option with
the highest percentage of lemmatized, non-stopword to-
kens covered by the BiDAF answer span). BiDAF was
trained on SQuAD then further tuned to science questions
using continued training.
Results
Table 6 summarizes the scores obtained by various base-
line algorithms on the test partitions of the Challenge and
Easy sets.
The IR and PMI (dataset deﬁnition) solvers, by design,
score near zero on the Challenge set. The slightly above-
zero score is due to the solver occasionally picking multiple
(tied) answers, resulting in a partial credit for a few ques-
tions. We include these questions in the Challenge set.
The most striking observation is that none of the algo-
rithms score signiﬁcantly higher than the random baseline
on the Challenge set, where the 95% conﬁdence interval is
2:5%. In contrast, their performance on the Easy set is
generally between 55% and 65%. This highlights the differ-
ent nature and difﬁculty of the Challenge set.
The poor performance of the non-IR solvers is partly ex-
plained by their correlation with the IR solver: the ﬁrst step
for nearly all of them (except TableILP, which uses non-
sentential knowledge but has low knowledge coverage) is
to use a simple IR method to obtain relevant sentences, and
then process them in different ways such as extracting struc-Test Scores
Solver Challenge Easy
Set Set
IR (dataset defn) (1.02)y(74.48)y
PMI (dataset defn) (2.03)y(77.82)y
IR (using ARC Corpus) 20.26 62.55
TupleInference 23.83 60.81
DecompAttnz24.34 58.27
Guess-all (“random”) 25.02 25.02
DGEM-OpenIEz26.41 57.45
BiDAFz26.54 50.11
TableILP 26.97 36.15
DGEM 27.11 58.97
yThese solvers were used to deﬁne the dataset, affecting scores.
zCode available at https://github.com/allenai/arc-solvers
Table 6: Performance of the different baseline sys-
tems. Scores are reported as percentages on the test
sets. For up-to-date results, see the ARC leaderboard at
http://data.allenai.org/arc.
ture, attempting matching, attempting chaining, etc. How-
ever, the retrieval bias of the underlying IR methods is to-
wards sentences that are all very similar to the question, and
away from sentences that individually only partially match
the question, but together fully explain the correct answer
(e.g., through chaining). This suggests the need for a more
advanced retrieval strategy for questions that require com-
bining multiple facts, as well as new methods for combining
that information.
Conclusion
Datasets have become highly inﬂuential in driving the direc-
tion of research. Recent datasets for QA have led to impres-
sive advances, but have focused on factoid questions where
surface-level cues alone are sufﬁcient to ﬁnd an answer, dis-
couraging progress on questions requiring reasoning or other
advanced methods. To help the ﬁeld move towards more dif-
ﬁcult tasks, we have presented the AI2 Reasoning Challenge
(ARC), consisting of a new question set, text corpus, and
baselines, and whose Challenge partition is hard for retrieval
and co-occurence methods. We ﬁnd that none of the base-
line systems tested can signiﬁcantly outperform a random
baseline on the Challenge set, including two neural models
with high performances on SNLI and SQuAD. Progress on
ARC would thus be an impressive achievement, given its
design, and be signiﬁcant step forward for the community.
To access ARC, view the leaderboard, and submit new en-
tries, visit the ARC Website at http://data.allenai.org/arc.
Availability The ARC Dataset, Corpus, three
baseline neural models (DecompAttn, BiDAF, and
DGEM), and the leaderboard, are all available
from http://data.allenai.org/arc.
References
R. Brachman. Selected grand challenges in cognitive sci-
ence. Technical Report Tech Report 05-1218, MITRE,
7
2005.
K. W. Church and P. Hanks. Word association norms, mutual
information and lexicography. In 27th ACL , pp. 76–83,
1989.
P. Clark and O. Etzioni. My Computer is an Honor Student
but how Intelligent is it? Standardized Tests as a Measure
of AI. AI Magazine , 2016. (To appear).
P. Clark, O. Etzioni, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, O. Tafjord, P. D.
Turney, and D. Khashabi. Combining retrieval, statistics,
and inference to answer elementary science questions. In
AAAI , pp. 2580–2586, 2016.
E. Davis. How to write science questions that are easy for
people and hard for computers. AI magazine , 37(1):13–
22, 2016.
A. Fujita, A. Kameda, A. Kawazoe, and Y . Miyao. Overview
of todai robot project and evaluation framework of its
nlp-based problem solving. In Proc. LREC’14 , vol. 36,
page 36, 2014.
S. Gururangan, S. Swayamdipta, O. Levy, R. Schwartz,
S. Bowman, and N. A. Smith. Annotation artifacts in nat-
ural language inference data. In Proc. of NAACL , 2018.
M. Henaff, J. Weston, A. Szlam, A. Bordes, and Y . LeCun.
Tracking the world state with recurrent entity networks.
CoRR , abs/1612.03969, 2016.
K. M. Hermann, T. Kocisky, E. Grefenstette, L. Espeholt,
W. Kay, M. Suleyman, and P. Blunsom. Teaching ma-
chines to read and comprehend. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pp. 1693–1701, 2015.
R. Jia and P. Liang. Adversarial examples for evaluating
reading comprehension systems. In Proc. EMNLP’17 ,
2017.
M. Joshi, E. Choi, D. S. Weld, and L. Zettlemoyer. Trivi-
aQA: A large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset
for reading comprehension. In Proc. ACL’17 , July 2017.
A. Kembhavi, M. Seo, D. Schwenk, J. Choi, A. Farhadi, and
H. Hajishirzi. Are you smarter than a sixth grader? text-
book question answering for multimodal machine com-
prehension. In CVPR , 2017.
D. Khashabi, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, P. Clark, O. Etzioni,
and D. Roth. Question answering via integer program-
ming over semi-structured knowledge. In IJCAI , 2016.
D. Khashabi, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, and D. Roth. Question
answering as global reasoning over semantic abstractions.
InAAAI’18 , 2018a.
D. Khashabi, T. K. A. Sabharwal, and D. Roth. Question
answering as global reasoning over semantic abstractions.
InAAAI , 2018b.
T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, and P. Clark. Answering complex
questions using open information extraction. In ACL,
2017.
T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, and P. Clark. SciTail: A textual
entailment dataset from science question answering. In
AAAI , 2018.NII. Evaluation of information access technologies. In Proc.
13th NTCIR Conf , 2017.
A. P. Parikh, O. T ¨ackstr ¨om, D. Das, and J. Uszkoreit. A
decomposable attention model for natural language infer-
ence. In EMNLP , 2016.
P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang. Squad:
100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text.
InProc. EMNLP’16 , 2016.
M. Richardson. Mctest: A challenge dataset for the open-
domain machine comprehension of text. In EMNLP’13 ,
2013.
C. Schoenick, P. Clark, O. Tafjord, P. Turney, and O. Et-
zioni. Moving beyond the turing test with the allen ai
science challenge. Communications of the ACM , 60(9):
60–64, 2017.
M. Seo, S. Min, A. Farhadi, and H. Hajishirzi. Query-
reduction networks for question answering. In ICLR ,
2017a.
M. J. Seo, H. Hajishirzi, A. Farhadi, and O. Etzioni. Dia-
gram understanding in geometry questions. In AAAI , pp.
2831–2838, 2014.
M. J. Seo, A. Kembhavi, A. Farhadi, and H. Hajishirzi. Bidi-
rectional attention ﬂow for machine comprehension. In
Proc. ICLR’17 , 2017b.
T. Simonite. Ai beat humans at reading! maybe not. In
WIRED Magazine , 2018.
E. Strickland. Can an ai get into the university of tokyo?
IEEE Spectrum , August 2013.
A. Trischler, T. Wang, X. Yuan, J. Harris, A. Sordoni,
P. Bachman, and K. Suleman. Newsqa: A machine com-
prehension dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09830 ,
2016.
J. Welbl, N. F. Liu, and M. Gardner. Crowdsourcing multiple
choice science questions. In Workshop on Noisy User-
generated Text , 2017a.
J. Welbl, P. Stenetorp, and S. Riedel. Constructing datasets
for multi-hop reading comprehension across documents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06481 , 2017b.
J. Weston, A. Bordes, S. Chopra, A. M. Rush, B. van
Merri ¨enboer, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov. Towards AI-
complete question answering: A set of prerequisite toy
tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.05698 , 2015.
J. Weston, S. Chopra, and A. Bordes. Memory networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.3916 , 2014.
Appendix A: Question Sources
Table 7 provides a brief description of the question sources
used to assemble ARC.
Appendix B: Question Answering via
Entailment
Given a large corpus of sentences (such as the ARC Cor-
pus), one natural way to answer multiple-choice questions
8
Source Description # Questions
Chall-
enge Easy
ACTAAP Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment, and Accountability Program 71 129
AIMS Arizona’s Instrument to Measure Standards 15 32
Alaska Dept Ed Alaska Department of Education & Early Development 38 62
AMP Alaska Measures of Progress 0 1
CA Stnds Test California Standards Test 19 59
FCAT Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test 3 3
LA Ed Assm. Prog Louisiana Department of Education 36 61
MD School Assm. Maryland School Assessment 66 89
MCAS MCAS-Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System 221 411
MEA Maine Educational Assessment 36 56
MEAP Michigan Educational Assessment Program 14 19
Mercury Our name for an anonymous content partner of AI2 who has generously provided
some of their science exam question data for non-commercial research purposes.1762 3366
MSA Maryland School Assessment 23 34
NAEP National Assessment of Educational Progress 12 37
NC READY Ready North Carolina 45 67
NY Regents New York State Educational Department Regents exams 103 422
Ohio Achieve. Tests Ohio Achievement Tests 14 44
TAKS Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills 12 29
TIMSS TIMSS 1995, 2003, 2007, & 2011 Assessments. Copyright (c) 2013 International
Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA)60 151
V A Stds of Learning Virginia Standards of Learning 37 120
WASL Washington Assessment of Student Learning 3 5
Table 7: The various question sources for ARC.
is by identifying the answer choice entailed by a sentence in
this corpus. We can, therefore, use an entailment model to
answer multiple-choice questions by (1) converting a ques-
tion and each answer choice into an assertion (2) comput-
ing the entailment scores for this assertion (hypothesis) from
sentences in our corpus (premise) (3) return the answer with
the highest support based on the entailment scores. We de-
scribe each step in further detail.
Question to Assertion
We convert a question, qand answer choice, ato an asser-
tion,hq;aby ﬁrst converting the question into a Fill-In-The-
Blank (FITB) statement, fq(e.g. Plants produce ). In cer-
tain cases, the questions were already in FITB form and in
other cases, we replace the wh-word with a blank. We also
drop phrases common in the multiple-choice question set-
ting, e.g. “of the following”, “of these”. Given a FITB state-
ment, we just replace the blank with the answer choice to
generate the assertion hq;a=replace (fq;; a). However,
this simple approach can lead to non-grammatical sentences.
E.g. “How many times does Earth rotate on its axis in one
day?” will be converted to “One many times does Earth ro-
tate on its axis in one day.”. A more sophisticated rule-based
approach could be developed to handle each question type;
but we leave this to future work.
Entailment Computation
Next, we use the entailment model to identify the support
for the generated hypothesis, hq;a. For a large-scale text cor-
pus, it would not be computationally feasible to compute thesupport from each sentence in the corpus. Since sentences
supporting the assertion are likely to have high lexical over-
lap, we use information retrieval as described earlier to ﬁnd
relevant sentences. We query an ElasticSearch index on this
corpus with the question and answer choice as a query. We
also require the matched sentence must contain the answer
choice to avoid sentences that can not be used to answer
questions. We ﬁlter long sentences ( >300characters), sen-
tences with negation and noisy sentences from the retrieved
sentences. Similar to SemanticILP (Khashabi et al., 2018a),
we pick the top 8 sentences (based on their ElasticSearch
score, score ir(pq;a; q+a)) across the answer choices for
each question. These sentences, Pqform the set of candi-
date premises used to compute the entailment score.
For an entailment model g, we can compute the score
for each question, answer choice and premise as pq;a2
Pq; score e(q; a; p q;a) =entails g(pq;a; hq;a). We present
the results with two neural entailment models, Decompos-
able Attention (Parikh et al., 2016) and Decomposed Graph
Entailment Model (DGEM) (Khot et al., 2018). Speciﬁcally
for DGEM, we also extract graph structure from the hypoth-
esis using Open IE and a chunker. Since the chunker uses
proprietary software, we also evaluate and release DGEM-
OpenIE that only uses the graph structure from Open IE and
ignores sentences with no Open IE extraction. These models
were trained on the Science Entailment dataset (Khot et al.,
2018), a dataset created in a similar manner where crowd-
workers annotated the premises and hypotheses as entailing
or not. Our released code5can also be easily extended to
5https://github.com/allenai/arc-solvers
9
use any other neural entailment model implemented in Al-
lenNLP.
Answer Scoring
Given the scores for each premise score e(q; a; p q;a), we
use the maximum supporting sentence score as the answer
choice score c(q; a) = max score e(q; a; p q;a).
10