Title: Transforming Question Answering Datasets Into Natural Language Inference Datasets

Transforming Question Answering Datasets
Into Natural Language Inference Datasets
Dorottya Demszky
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University
ddemszky@stanford.eduKelvin Guu
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
kguu@stanford.eduPercy Liang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
Existing datasets for natural language in-
ference (NLI) have propelled research on
language understanding. We propose a
new method for automatically deriving NLI
datasets from the growing abundance of large-
scale question answering datasets.
Our approach hinges on learning a sen-
tence transformation model which converts
question-answer pairs into their declarative
forms. Despite being primarily trained on a
single QA dataset, we show that it can be suc-
cessfully applied to a variety of other QA re-
sources. Using this system, we automatically
derive a new freely available dataset of over
500k NLI examples (QA-NLI), and show that
it exhibits a wide range of inference phenom-
ena rarely seen in previous NLI datasets.
1 Introduction
Natural language inference (NLI) is a task that in-
corporates much of what is necessary to under-
stand language, such as the ability to leverage
world knowledge or perform lexico-syntactic rea-
soning. Given two sentences, a premise and a hy-
pothesis, an NLI system must determine whether
the hypothesis is implied by the premise.
Numerous datasets have emerged to evaluate
NLI systems (Marelli et al., 2014; Pavlick and
Callison-Burch, 2016; Lai et al., 2017a). Two of
the largest ones, SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015) and
MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2017) are rich in var-
ious linguistic phenomena relevant to inference
(e.g. quantiﬁcation and negation), but they lack
certain other phenomena, such as multi-sentence
reasoning, which can be important for various
downstream applications.
In this paper, we propose to augment and diver-
sify NLI datasets by automatically deriving large-
Equal contribution.
P: Taylor is a journalist […]. She was playing golf with Ron when her phone rang. It was Liz, her mother’s friend. […]Q: Who called Taylor?
D: A doctor called Taylor.D: Ron called Taylor.D: Liz called Taylor.A: LizA: RonA: a doctorentailmentcontradictionunknownQA2DFigure 1: We learn a mapping from a question-answer
pair into a declarative sentence (QA2D), which allows
us to convert question answering datasets into natural
language inference datasets.
scale NLI datasets from existing question answer-
ing(QA) datasets, which have recently become
abundant and capture a wide range of reasoning
phenomena.1
Inspired by the connection between QA and
NLI noted by Dagan et al. (2006), we take the fol-
lowing approach: given a passage of text, a ques-
tion about it ( Q:Who called Taylor? ) and an an-
swer ( A:Liz), we perform sentence transforma-
tions to combine the question and answer into a
declarative answer sentence ( D:Liz called Tay-
lor). We then observe that the passage and the
declarative sentence form a (premise, hypothesis)
NLI pair. This is illustrated in Figure 1, and elab-
orated on in Section 2, where we also discuss how
to generate negative (non-entailed) examples. This
approach is similar to the way SciTail (Khot et al.,
2018) was constructed, except that our method is
fully automated.
Deriving NLI from QA has two key advantages.
1Data and code are available here:
https://bit.ly/2OMm4vKarXiv:1809.02922v2  [cs.CL]  11 Sep 2018
Properties MovieQA NewsQA QAMR RACE SQuAD
# wh questions 11k 100k 100k 20k 100k
Domain Movie plots CNN Wikinews + Wikipedia English exams Wikipedia
Multiple choice yes no no yes no
Answer type free-form span span free-form span
Passage type 1-3 sentences mult. par. sentence paragraph paragraph
Avg question length 10.7 7.6 6.7 11 11.5
Avg word overlap 46% 73% 50% 62% 75%
Table 1: Properties of the different QA datasets that we evaluated on. Together they cover a wide range of domains
and evidence (passage) types, from sentences to multiple paragraphs and they add up to about 500k NLI examples
including the multiple choice QA options. The average question length is counted by tokens and the average word
overlap is measured by the percentage of tokens from the question that appear in the evidence.
First, large-scale QA datasets are abundant. Sec-
ond, existing QA datasets cover a wide range of
reasoning strategies, which we can now import
into the study of NLI. Both advantages likely stem
from the fact that question answering and question
formulation are organic tasks that people perform
in daily life — making QA data easy to crowd-
source (He et al., 2015), and easy to ﬁnd in well-
designed pre-existing resources such as reading
comprehension exams (Lai et al., 2017b). In Sec-
tion 3, we describe the QA datasets we work with.
Deriving a declarative sentence from a
question-answer pair is the key step of our ap-
proach, a subtask that we call QA2D. We explore
three different ways to perform QA2D: (i) a
rule-based system (Section 4), (ii) crowdsourcing
(Section 5) and (iii) a neural sequence model
(Section 6).
These three approaches build on each other: we
demonstrate that a good rule-based system can ac-
celerate and improve the quality of crowdsourcing
(by providing workers with an initial draft) while
not introducing any systematic bias. This enables
us to collect a dataset of 100,000 (Q; A; D )triples,
which we then use to train a neural QA2D model.
Although this model is primarily trained on triples
from SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), we show
that our model generalizes very well to other QA
datasets spanning a variety of domains, such as
Wikipedia, newswire and movie plots. Our au-
tomatically generated declaratives exactly match
the human gold answer 45–57% of the time, with
BLEU scores ranging between 73–83, depending
on the dataset (Section 7).
With our automated QA2D system in place, we
apply it to ﬁve different QA datasets, creating over
500,000 NLI examples, which we make freely
available. Given the diverse nature of the QA
datasets we use, the resulting NLI dataset (QA-NLI) also exhibits a wide range of different in-
ference phenomena, such as multi-sentence and
meta-level reasoning and presupposition-based in-
ference. We perform a thorough analysis of the re-
sulting phenomena, quantifying this diversity both
in terms of the type of reasoning and the contex-
tual scope required to perform that reasoning. We
also conduct other analyses that suggest that our
approach can eliminate some of the annotation ar-
tifacts (Gururangan et al., 2018) present in SNLI
and MultiNLI.
2 Approach
We now formally deﬁne our framework for con-
verting a QA example into an NLI example, in-
cluding how to generate negative (non-entailed)
NLI examples.
A QA example contains a passage of text P, a
question Qregarding the text and an answer span
A, as illustrated in Figure 1. We perform sentence
transformations (QA2D) to combine QandAinto
a declarative answer sentence D. We then simply
recognize that if Ais a correct answer, then (P; D )
is an entailed NLI pair.
Alternatively, if Ais an incorrect answer or Q
cannot be answered using the information in P,
thenDisnotimplied by P, yielding a negative
NLI pair. Incorrect answers are available in QA
datasets featuring multiple choice answers, such
as MovieQA (Tapaswi et al., 2016), RACE (Lai
et al., 2017b) and MCTest (Richardson et al.,
2013). Unanswerable questions are available in
SQuADRUn (Rajpurkar et al., 2018) and we ex-
pect the number of such datasets to grow with the
advancement of QA research.
Inference labels. In existing NLI datasets, ex-
amples are labeled with one of three relations: en-
tailment, neutral/unknown or contradiction. When
Q: Where does Jim go to buy groceries?A: Trader Joe’sIII. Jim goes where to buy groceries?I. Where does Jim goes to buy groceries?II. Where Jim goes to buy groceries?remove  do-supportreverse wh-movementdelete question words & markplug in AIV. Jim goes Trader Joe’s to buy groceries.V. Jim goes to Trader Joe’s to buy groceries.insert prepositionFigure 2: An illustration of the syntactic transforma-
tions needed to perform QA2D. In this example, to per-
form step II one needs to know that where is comple-
ment of goand not that of buy, and to perform step V ,
one needs to chose the appropriate preposition to insert.
performing automated QA2D, we can only make a
two-way distinction between entailment and non-
entailment.2
Weakly supervised QA datasets. In many QA
datasets, the passage Pis a short paragraph (e.g.
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)) or even a sin-
gle sentence (e.g. QAMR (Michael et al., 2018)).
This yields a short, simple premise in the resulting
NLI example. However, some weakly supervised
QA datasets such as NewsQA (Trischler et al.,
2017), RACE and TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017)
choose Pbe an entire document or even corpus of
documents. In this case, the resulting NLI pair’s
premise could be large, but is still valid. In Ta-
ble 1, we describe the “passage type” for each QA
dataset we work with.
3 Datasets
Table 1 summarizes the properties of the ﬁve
QA datasets we transform into NLI: MovieQA,
NewsQA, QAMR and RACE and SQuAD. When
choosing the datasets, we sought to maximize the
structural and topical diversity of our data.
The domains of these datasets include movie
plots, newswire text, Wikipedia and English ex-
ams that cover a wide range of genres and topics.
Thepassage types range from a sentence to mul-
2It is tempting to think that incorrect answers yield con-
tradiction labels, while unanswerable questions yield neutral
labels. Unfortunately, this is false. Figure 1 illustrates an
example where an incorrect multiple choice answer does not
yield a contradiction. As for unanswerable questions, one ex-
ample would be: P: “The score was negative.”, Q: “What
was the exact score?” (unanswerable), A: “10” (yields con-
tradiction, not neutral).tiple paragraphs3and the answer type may be ei-
ther a substring (span) within the passage or free-
response text. The questions vary greatly in terms
of their type and difﬁculty: questions in QAMR
hinge on selecting the right arguments within a
single sentence, while questions in RACE, writ-
ten for middle- and high-schoolers, require holis-
tic reasoning about the text (e.g. What is the main
message of the passage? ).
4 QA2D: Rule-based
At ﬁrst glance, QA2D appears to be a highly
structured task guided by clear rules — indeed,
the reverse problem of converting declarative sen-
tences into questions is often taught in gram-
mar textbooks. However, this belies the many
nuanced semantic decisions that are effortlessly
made by native English speakers, yet challenging
to codify. For example, non-native speakers ﬁnd
it notoriously hard to prepend the right preposi-
tions/articles before phrases, as there are no simple
rules.
To demonstrate these challenges, we develop a
strong rule-based system (see Section 7 for results)
to test how far we can go towards solving QA2D.
The main steps of this system are illustrated in Fig-
ure 2.
The success of the rule-based model hinges
on part-of-speech tagging and parsing accuracy,
given that we need to correctly identify the wh-
word, the root word, any auxiliary or copula, as
well as prepositions and particles that are depen-
dents of the wh-word or the root. We used the
state-of-the-art Stanford Graph-Based Neural De-
pendency Parser (Dozat et al., 2017) to POS tag
and parse QandA. We found that about 10% of
the mistakes made by our rule-based system are
due to tagging/parsing errors.4
We encountered several semantic idiosyncrasies
that proved difﬁcult to account for by rules. For
example, if the answer span is a bare named entity
(i.e. without an article) referring to an organiza-
tion/institution, generally it is okay to leave it bare
3For MovieQA, we only used the plot summaries as the
evidence, but one could easily use the full movie scripts or
audiovisual data as well.
4The main errors made by the tagger/parser include tag-
ging a verb as a noun, which is prevalent because in the pres-
ence of do-support, the inﬂections are removed from the main
verb (e.g. When did the war end?). Another class of parsing
errors is identiﬁcation of the parent of a dangling preposi-
tion/particle (e.g. Which friend did Olga send a letter tolast
week? ).
Split Source # Ex. # Ann. Setup
trainSQuAD 68986 1E (74%)
S (26%)
Other 41000 1 S
devSQuAD7350 1 S
1000 3 S
Other 4500 1 S
testSQuAD7377 1 S
1000 3 S
Other 41000 3 S
Table 2: The composition of our collected data. # Ex.
and # Ann. refer to the number of unique examples
and to the number of annotations (gold answers) per
example, respectively. The last column lists the setup
that was used for collecting the examples: post-editing
(E) or from scratch (S). “Other” denotes the four other
QA datasets besides SQuAD. The gray indicates the
examples that we used for our evaluations in Section 7.
(e.g. Sam works at WHO. ), but sometimes a deﬁ-
nite article needs to be inserted (e.g. Sam works at
the UN ).
5 QA2D: crowdsourced
Even though our rule-based model is reasonably
strong, it is far from perfect. We decided to build a
supervised neural model, which required the col-
lection of human-authored gold declarative sen-
tences. We describe our data collection method
(Section 5.1) and the distribution of our collected
data across the ﬁve QA datasets (Section 5.2).
5.1 Data Collection
We crowdsourced the QA2D task on Amazon Me-
chanical Turk using two different setups. In Setup
S, Turkers were presented with QandA, then
asked to write a full sentence answer Dfrom
Scratch. In Setup E, instead of writing Dfrom
scratch, Turkers were asked to Edit the output of
our rule-based system (see Section 4) until it is a
well-formed sentence. Turkers were not provided
with the supporting passage Pin either setup be-
cause we wanted to prevent them from including
information in Dthat is not supported by Q.
Writing from scratch vs post-editing. There is
a trade-off between the two setups: while Setup
S minimizes bias towards the rule-based output,
writing from scratch takes more time and leaves
room for more typos than post-editing. Indeed,
when comparing 100 random examples generated
from each setup, we found that 91% of Setup
S outputs were valid (grammatical and completewhile 97% of Setup E outputs were valid. How-
ever, since Setup E could potentially bias our data,
we exclusively used Setup S for collecting all eval-
uation data.
5.2 Distribution of Source QA Datasets
We decided to select one QA dataset among the
ﬁve QA datasets to collect the majority of our
data, so that we could test the ability of our neural
model (Section 6) to generalize to other datasets.
We chose SQuAD to be the main source of QA
pairs because of its large size, high quality and
syntactic diversity. We limited ourselves to its
training set for the data collection, ﬁltering out
non-wh-questions, which left us with a total of
85,713 QA pairs.5In addition, we randomly sam-
pled a smaller set of QA pairs from the four other
datasets, most of which were used for evaluation.
Table 2 summarizes the composition of our
newly collected dataset of gold declarative answer
sentences. For each of the dev and test sets, we
collected three annotations for 1000 examples to
account for the fact that there can be multiple pos-
sible correct QA2D transformations. The distri-
bution of datasets within the three data splits are:
train (95% SQuAD, 5% other four), dev (81%
SQuAD, 19% other four) and test (20% for each
ﬁve datasets).
6 QA2D: Neural Sequence Model
In Section 4, we discussed some of the issues
(mostly involving semantics) that our rule-based
system cannot handle. To improve over this base-
line, we develop a neural sequence generation
model to perform QA2D.
From the crowdsourcing described in the previ-
ous section, we have a dataset of ( Q,A,D) tuple.
We use this to learn a model of p(DjQ; A ), im-
plemented with an encoder-decoder architecture.
The inputs QandAare each encoded using a
bidirectional three-layer LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997) (the same encoder weights
are used for both inputs). Dis then generated
using a three-layer LSTM decoder equipped with
one attention head (Bahdanau et al., 2015) for each
input, and a copy mechanism based on Gu et al.
(2016).6Word embeddings are initialized with
5The random split between train (80%), dev (10%) and
test (10%) sets was made based on Wikipedia article titles
corresponding to the QA pairs.
6The copy mechanism is similar to Gu et al. (2016), ex-
cept that out-of-vocabulary copyable words are represented
Figure 3: Figure (a) shows the results based on question type (brackets indicate their proportion in the data) and
Figure (b) shows the results based on the length of Q+A. The error bars denote the 99% conﬁdence interval
for the true expected performance of each model (randomness comes from noise in Turker annotations and the
random sampling of the evaluation set). Note: human and model scores should not be directly compared. Human
agreement is maximum BLEU score when comparing each of 3 human annotations against the two others, while
the models’ outputs are compared against the 3 human annotations. We include human results to quantify variation
across human annotators.
GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014). The model is
then trained using a standard cross entropy loss
minimized with Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014).
7 QA2D: Results
In this section, we assess the performance of our
rule-based (R ULE-BASED ) and neural (N EURAL )
QA2D systems, using both automated metrics and
human evaluation. The evaluations are conducted
on the test set formed from all ﬁve QA datasets
(gray cells in Table 2) where each example in-
cludes three human annotations.
7.1 Quantitative Results
For our quantitative evaluation, we employed two
metrics: BLEU and string match (ignoring case
and punctuation). We evaluated N EURAL both on
the top 1 output and on the top 5 outputs (max over
the beam).
Rule-based vs neural. Overall, the perfor-
mance of N EURAL is consistently stronger than
RULE-BASED . From Table 4, we see that across
datasets, N EURAL leads R ULE-BASED by an av-
erage of 2.6 BLEU points, and by 6.2% on exact
match accuracy. N EURAL is also capable of pro-
ducing a top-5 beam of outputs, and when we eval-
uate only the best of these 5 outputs, we observe
an almost 30% improvement in scores.
We ﬁnd that predictions of N EURAL and
RULE-BASED exactly match 40% of the time.
using absolute positional embeddings, rather than the en-
coder’s hidden state at the position of the copyable word.Table 3 includes examples when the two mod-
els’ outputs do not match. As we hypothe-
sized, the N EURAL learned semantic patterns,
such as preposition/article choice and the removal
of redundant words from the answer span, that
RULE-BASED was not able to handle.
Results by dataset. Table 4 breaks down the
models’ performance by dataset. The ﬁrst thing to
note is the domain-generality of the models — al-
though BLEU scores are highest on SQuAD, they
are only 1-3 points lower on other datasets. As for
the exact match, we actually ﬁnd that both models
perform better on QAMR than on SQuAD. This
discrepancy is likely due to the length penalty in
BLEU, which is affected by shorter answer lengths
in QAMR.
RULE-BASED performs worst on RACE,
MovieQA and SQuAD (6-9 points lower on
exact match) in comparison to N EURAL due to
the fact that the answers in these datasets often
require semantically motivated modiﬁcations that
RULE-BASED cannot handle.
Results by question length. Figure 3 (b) shows
the correlation between the combined length of
the question-plus-answer and each model’s per-
formance. R ULE-BASED ’s performance is more
robust to length increase beyond 30 tokens than
NEURAL , even if we consider N EURAL ’s top-5
performance. In contrast, N EURAL does better
on inputs shorter than 20 tokens — which con-
stitute the majority of the examples — than on
longer ones, which is possibly due to the general
Question Answer RULE-BASED NEURAL
When was Madonna born? August 16, 1958 Madonna was born in August 16, 1958. Madonna was born on August 16, 1958.
Who asks who to hit them
outside of the bar?Tyler asks the
Narrator to hit himTyler asks the Narrator to hit him asks
who to hit them outside of the bar.Tyler asks the narrator to hit them outside
of the bar.
What surprising fact do the guys
learn about Jones?That he has never
killed anyoneThe guys learn that he has never
killed anyone about Jones.The guys learned about Jones that he has
never killed anyone.
Where is someone overlooked? American societySomeone is overlooked in American
society.Someone overlooked is in American
society.
When did Johnson crash
into the wall?halfway through
the raceJohnson crashed into the wall
halfway through the race.Johnson shot into the wall halfway
through the race.
What is an example of a corporate
sponsor of a basketball team?Marathon OilAn example of a corporate sponsor of
a basketball team is Marathon Oil.Marathon Oil is an example of a corporate
sponsor of a basketball team.
Where was the baby found?onboard a Carnival
cruise ship,The baby was found in onboard a
Carnival cruise ship.The baby was found at onboard a Carnival
cruise ship.
Table 3: A randomly picked sample of those outputs where N EURAL6=RULE-BASED . Green indicates good
output(s) and red indicates bad ones.
Dataset MovieQA NewsQA QAMR RACE SQuAD
Model RM NM RM NM RM NM RM NM RM NM
Top 1BLEU 81 84 82 83 82 85 80 83 82 86
Match 38 44 49 49 54 57 30 44 45 53
Top 5BLEUN/A89N/A88N/A90N/A89N/A91
Match 52 58 67 55 62
Table 4: BLEU and exact match scores (out of a 100) when compar-
ing the outputs of R ULE-BASED (RM) and N EURAL (NM) against the
human gold.
Figure 4: Human evaluation of the
the human, R ULE-BASED and N EURAL
outputs.
tendency of N EURAL to output shorter sequences.
Results by question type. In Figure 3 (a) we
present the results broken down by question cat-
egory, which we determined based on the type
of wh word in the question. We can see that
our models perform best on who questions, which
is not surprising because there is usually no wh-
movement involved when transforming such ques-
tions into declaratives (i.e. the wh word simply
needs to be replaced). In contrast, the overall
performance of the models is the worst on which
questions, which is most likely due to the fact that
the majority of such questions require a decision
about which words from the wh phrase to include
inDand in what position.
The only question type for which we see
a signiﬁcant difference between performance of
RULE-BASED and that of the neural one is how
questions (note that how many , for example, is
considered to be a how question). This is because
RULE-BASED — in contrast to N EURAL — does
not copy words from the wh phrase into D, which
mainly affects howquestions negatively, given that
how many tends to be followed by at least one
noun (e.g. how many people ).7.2 Human Evaluation
We crowdsourced the evaluation of R ULE-BASED
and N EURAL on a sample of 100 QA examples
for each of the ﬁve datasets. For reference, we also
treated human outputs as a third system (H UMAN ).
In each Turk task, a Turker is presented with three
outputs (one from each system, in a randomly
shufﬂed order) and is asked to rate them (given a
question and an answer span) with respect to three
criteria: grammaticality, naturalness, and com-
pleteness.7The results are shown in Figure 4.
For grammar, the models’ outputs are lower
than H UMAN (4.6), at 3.8 for R ULE-BASED and
7Description of ratings:
grammaticality: 1 – Extremely poor, 2 – Poor, 3 – OK but has
some issue(s), 4 – Good but slightly unnatural, 5 – Good
naturalness: 1 – Extremely unnatural, 2 – Unnatural, 3 – OK
in some contexts, 4 – Natural, but could be more so, 5 – Very
natural
completeness: 1 – Lacks many important words from the
question or the answer, 2 – Lacks a few important words from
the question or the answer, 3 – The sentence is missing one or
two words that would add more information, but they aren’t
necessary, 4 – The sentence is missing one or two words but
it still conveys the same meaning without them, 5 – The sen-
tence is maximally complete in terms of words (regardless of
grammaticality)
Reasoning Description Example Source
ArgumentAffects only a single
argument of a predicate in T.T:Caitlin de Wit : I ran a little bit, and I rode horses.
H: Caitlin is de Wit’s ﬁrst name.QAMR
SentenceAffects one or more
predicates within a single
sentence in T.T: Michael Jackson will perform 10 concerts in London
in July in what he described Thursday as a ”ﬁnal curtain call. ” [...]
H: Michael Jackson has announced 10 concerts.NewsQA
Multi-
sentenceAffects multiple sentences
inT.T: [...] invented by the British scientist William Sturgeon [...]
Following Sturgeon’s work, [...] motor [...] built by [...] Thomas Davenport [...]
The motors ran at up to 600 revolutions per minute [...]
H: Sturgeon and Davenport s motors ran at 600 revolutions per minute .SQuAD
QuantitiesCounting or performing other
numerical operations;
understanding relations
between quantities.T: It provided more than $20 billion in direct ﬁnancial.
H: It only yielded $100,000 in direct ﬁnancial.MultiNLI
Naive
physicsSpatiotemporal/physical
reasoning that requires
a mental simulation of the
event beyond understanding
the meaning of the words.T: David J. Lavau, 67, of Lake Hughes, California, was found in
a ravine a week after losing control of his car on a rural road and
plunging 500 feet down an embankment into heavy brush [...]
H: Lavau’s car came to a rest 500 feet down an embankment.NewsQA
AttributesReasoning about attributes
and affordances of entities.T: The situation in Switzerland [...]. The Swiss German dialects
arethe default everyday language in virtually every situation [...]
H: Swiss German is the dialect spoken in Switzerland.SQuAD
PsychologyMaking inferences involving
people’s mental states and
attitudes and the way they
express them.T: Dear Jorge, [...] My family are now in Sacramento, California. [...]
Before I knew it , there was hot water shooting up about 60 feet into
the air. [...] I’d love to learn more about this geyser and other geysers [...]
Your friend,Bennetto
H: Bennetto’s letter expressed excitement .RACE
MetaReasoning about the genre,
text structure and author.T: A man and his young son struggle to survive after an
unspeciﬁed cataclysm has killed most plant and animal life. [...]
H: We meet a man and his young son at the beginning of the ﬁlm .MovieQA
OtherIncorporating any other
world knowledge.T: When asked a life lesson he had to learn the hard way, the billionaire said
staying up too late is a habit he is still trying to break. “Don’t stay up too
late[...]
H: Bill Gates gave the advice to avoid staying up too late.RACE
Table 5: Examples illustrating the different types of reasoning required to determine whether the text Tentails the
hypothesis H.
3.9 for N EURAL . A score of 4 represents the rat-
ingGood but slightly unnatural . The same per-
tains to the naturalness scores as well. In terms
of completeness, the rule-based and N EURAL both
do relatively well (.2-.3 points lower than the hu-
man score of 4.8), which is well above the thresh-
old for retaining the correct meaning, given that a
rating of 4 requires there to be no semantic conse-
quences of incompleteness.
8 Analysis of NLI Datasets
In this section, we analyze the various phenomena
of the NLI datasets we generated (Section 8.1),
validate our assumptions about how an answer’s
correct/incorrect status determines the resulting
inference label (Section 8.2) and compare our
datasets to others in terms of annotation artifacts
(Section 8.3).
8.1 Inference Phenomena
We manually annotated 100 examples for the
scope andtype of reasoning required to make acorrect inference classiﬁcation. The categories
and their descriptions, paired with examples are
illustrated in Table 5. Looking at the counts in
Table 6, we can notice that MovieQA, NewsQA
and SQuAD are similar. The majority of examples
in these datasets require sentence-level reasoning,
and the rest are split between multi-sentence and
argument-level reasoning at a roughly 5:3 ratio.
While the counts for the types of reasoning are
also very close among these datasets, the slight
differences can be explained based on genre. For
example, plot summaries often focus on human
motivations/emotions ( psych ). MultiNLI is clos-
est to these datasets in terms of phenomena counts
as well, except that it involves hardly any multi-
sentence reasoning and less world knowledge than
the other three.
QAMR is unique in that, by construction, two
thirds of the examples only involve argument-
level reasoning and none of them involve multi-
sentence reasoning. Given that inference pairs in
QAMR often involve turning a noun phrase into
MovieQA NewsQA QAMR RACE SQuAD MultiNLIscopeargument 19 13 62 1 15 26
sentence 56 53 38 14 58 72
multi-sentence 25 34 0 85 27 2type of reasoningquantities 1 1 1 1 2 4
naive physics 4 7 0 5 4 3
psych 9 0 1 48 1 5
meta 2 5 0 12 0 1
attributes 41 41 12 58 40 29
other world kn. 34 15 8 68 14 5
Table 6: Counts for different scope and reasoning types in the ﬁve con-
verted QA datasets in comparison to MultiNLI. We manually annotated
100 examples per dataset. While the scope categories are mutually ex-
clusive, the reasoning types are not.
Figure 5: The distribution of inference
ratings for NLI examples based on in-
correct multiple choice option or correct
multiple choice option.
a predicate, this dataset provides us with a lot of
inference pairs that stem from presuppositions —
i.e. entailments that still hold even if the premise
is negated (e.g. Taylor Brown was playing golf
outside. andTaylor Brown was notplaying golf
outside. both presuppose Taylor’s last name is
Brown. ).
RACE, in sharp contrast to QAMR, mostly in-
cludes entailments that require multi-sentence rea-
soning. In addition, inference pairs in RACE
make extensive use of world knowledge, meta-
level reasoning (e.g., about the genre, author’s in-
tentions, etc.), and reasoning about human psy-
chology (e.g., a character’s reaction to an event).
8.2 Inference Labels
In Section 2, we made the assumption that infer-
ence pairs generated from incorrect answers will
be non-entailments. To verify this hypothesis, we
crowdsource the inference labeling of 2000 in-
ference pairs based on MovieQA, half of which
are generated from correct answer options and
half from incorrect ones.8In the task, each
Turker was provided with ﬁve randomly selected
premise-hypothesis pairs (T; H )and was asked to
rate how likely His true given T.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of inference rat-
ings with the examples separated based on incor-
rect/correct answer options as their source. The
human ratings show a strong correlation between
answer type and inference score — as for correct
ones, more than 90% of the examples are more
likely to be true than false and as for incorrect
8For the 1000 examples based on correct answers, we
used the test set we already collected. We collected the 1000
examples for incorrect answers using the same QA pairs as
for the correct answers. The incorrect answer, in the case
of each example, was randomly chosen among the incorrect
options.
Figure 6: The distribution of the length of NLI exam-
ples, generated from MovieQA. Unlike in SNLI and
MultiNLI, we found little correlation between the in-
ference label and sentence lengths.
ones, about 80% are not likely to be true. These
ﬁndings also support a non-binary notion of en-
tailment, as we can see that about half of the ex-
amples in both categories do not ﬁt into the strict
entailment/contradiction dichotomy.
8.3 Annotation Artifacts
We replicate some of the statistical analyses that
Gururangan et al. (2018) performed on SNLI and
MultiNLI to see whether our datasets contain ar-
tifacts similar to SNLI and MultiNLI. We per-
form the analyses on the same dataset we used in
Section 8.2, based on MovieQA. We ranked the
words with the highest PMI( word, class ) values
and found that in our case the non-entailments in
our dataset no longer have negation words and the
entailments no longer have positive or non-speciﬁc
words such as those found in SNLI and MultiNLI
(Table 7). We also looked at the distribution of
hypotheses lengths, separated by label (Figure 6)
and found little/no correlation between the length
of an example and its label.
entailment neutral contradiction
MQAﬁnd all
take police
years york
son car
shoot can
SNLIoutdoors tall nobody
least ﬁrst sleeping
instrument competition no
outside sad tv
animal favorite cat
MNLIsome also never
yes because no
something popular nothing
sometimes many any
various most none
Table 7: Top 5 words ordered based on their PMI
(word, class ) with the percentage of examples they oc-
cur in in a given class , based on the entailments gener-
ated from MovieQA (MQA). The statistics for SNLI
and MultiNLI (MNLI) are copied from Gururangan
et al. (2018).
9 Related Work & Discussion
NLI datasets. NLI has long served as a testbed
for natural language understanding (Dagan et al.,
2006). More recently, the emergence of larger-
scale datasets (Bowman et al., 2015; Williams
et al., 2017) have also enabled researchers to lever-
age NLI resources as a rich source of training data
to achieve transfer learning gains on other tasks
(Conneau et al., 2017). Our datasets are comple-
mentary to previous resources, inheriting a rich set
of phenomena found in many QA datasets (e.g.
high-level reasoning about texts).
QA to NLI. Although White et al. (2017)
and Poliak et al. (2018) have explored recasting
datasets created for various semantic classiﬁcation
tasks (e.g. semantic role labeling and named en-
tity recognition) into NLI datasets, we are the ﬁrst
to perform such an automated conversion on QA
datasets. However, we are not the ﬁrst to observe
the connection between QA and NLI. In fact, the
seminal work of Dagan et al. (2006) employed this
connection to construct a portion of their dataset
and so have the creators of SciTail (Khot et al.,
2018), but performed the QA2D step with human
experts, rather than an automated system.
Text transformation tasks. By “reformatting”
QA to NLI, we obtain a more generic representa-
tion of inferences: declarative sentences are trans-
formed into other declarative sentences. This is
the same type signature as for sentence simpliﬁca-tion (Chandrasekar et al., 1996), paraphrase (Lin
and Pantel, 2001; Bannard and Callison-Burch,
2005) and summarization (Jones, 1993), high-
lighting the close connection between these tasks.
Importantly, declarative sentences are closed un-
der this set of operations, allowing them to be
chained together to perform more complex infer-
ences (Kolesnyk et al., 2016).
Another related task is question generation (Rus
and Arthur, 2009), which could be considered the
reverse of QA2D, although the focus is on select-
ing interesting questions, rather than robust sen-
tence transformation.
Neural sequence generation. Our QA2D sys-
tem could be implemented by any general-purpose
sequence generation model. With rapid progress
on better generation architectures (Gehring et al.,
2017; Vaswani et al., 2017), we believe it should
be possible to further increase the data efﬁciency
and performance, especially by leveraging mod-
els that incorporate syntactic structure (Chen et al.,
2017; Eriguchi et al., 2017) or a more transducer-
like structure (Graves, 2012; Yu et al., 2016).
Future systems. Finally, we hope that by in-
creasing the scale of NLI training resources, we
can enable the development of a large variety of
new systems such as generative NLI models which
can take a premise and generate relevant hypothe-
ses (Kolesnyk et al., 2016), sentence decomposi-
tion models which can break a sentence into mul-
tiple entailed parts, and sentence synthesis models
which can stitch multiple pieces back into an en-
tailed whole.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Chris Potts and members
of the Stanford NLP group for their valuable feed-
back.
References
D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio. 2015. Neural
machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) .
C. Bannard and C. Callison-Burch. 2005. Paraphrasing
with bilingual parallel corpora. In Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) , pages 597–604.
S. Bowman, G. Angeli, C. Potts, and C. D. Manning.
2015. A large annotated corpus for learning natural
language inference. In Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP) .
R. Chandrasekar, C. Doran, and B. Srinivas. 1996. Mo-
tivations and methods for text simpliﬁcation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 16th conference on Computational
linguistics-Volume 2 , pages 1041–1044.
H. Chen, S. Huang, D. Chiang, and J. Chen.
2017. Improved neural machine translation with a
syntax-aware encoder and decoder. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.05436 .
A. Conneau, D. Kiela, H. Schwenk, L. Barrault, and
A. Bordes. 2017. Supervised learning of universal
sentence representations from natural language in-
ference data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02364 .
I. Dagan, O. Glickman, and B. Magnini. 2006. The
PASCAL recognising textual entailment challenge .
Machine learning challenges. evaluating predictive
uncertainty, visual object classiﬁcation, and recog-
nising tectual entailment.
T. Dozat, P. Qi, and C. D. Manning. 2017. Stanford’s
graph-based neural dependency parser at the conll
2017 shared task. In Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL) , pages 20–30.
A. Eriguchi, Y . Tsuruoka, and K. Cho. 2017. Learn-
ing to parse and translate improves neural machine
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03525 .
J. Gehring, M. Auli, D. Grangier, D. Yarats, and
Y . N. Dauphin. 2017. Convolutional sequence to se-
quence learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03122 .
A. Graves. 2012. Sequence transduction with recurrent
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.3711 .
J. Gu, Z. Lu, H. Li, and V . O. Li. 2016. Incorporating
copying mechanism in sequence-to-sequence learn-
ing. In Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL) .
S. Gururangan, S. Swayamdipta, O. Levy, R. Schwartz,
S. R. Bowman, and N. A. Smith. 2018. Annotation
artifacts in natural language inference data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.02324 .
L. He, M. Lewis, and L. Zettlemoyer. 2015. Question-
answer driven semantic role labeling: Using natu-
ral language to annotate natural language. In Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) .
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-
term memory. Neural Computation , 9(8):1735–
1780.
K. S. Jones. 1993. What might be in a summary? In-
formation retrieval , 93:9–26.
M. Joshi, E. Choi, D. Weld, and L. Zettlemoyer. 2017.
TriviaQA: A large scale distantly supervised chal-
lenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. 2018.
Scitail: A textual entailment dataset from science
question answering. In Proceedings of AAAI .
D. Kingma and J. Ba. 2014. Adam: A method
for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 .
V . Kolesnyk, T. Rockt ¨aschel, and S. Riedel. 2016. Gen-
erating natural language inference chains. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.01404 .
A. Lai, Y . Bisk, and J. Hockenmaier. 2017a. Natural
language inference from multiple premises. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.02925 .
G. Lai, Q. Xie, H. Liu, Y . Yang, and E. Hovy.
2017b. Race: Large-scale reading comprehen-
sion dataset from examinations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04683 .
D. Lin and P. Pantel. 2001. Discovery of inference
rules for question-answering. Natural Language
Engineering , 7:343–360.
M. Marelli, S. Menini, M. Baroni, L. Bentivogli,
R. bernardi, and R. Zamparelli. 2014. A SICK cure
for the evaluation of compositional distributional se-
mantic models. In Language Resources and Evalu-
ation Conference (LREC) .
J. Michael, G. Stanovsky, L. He, I. Dagan, and
L. Zettlemoyer. 2018. Crowdsourcing question–
answer meaning representations. In North Amer-
ican Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL) .
E. Pavlick and C. Callison-Burch. 2016. Most” ba-
bies” are” little” and most” problems” are” huge”:
Compositional entailment in adjective-nouns. In As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , vol-
ume 1, pages 2164–2173.
J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning. 2014.
Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) .
Adam Poliak, Aparajita Haldar, Rachel Rudinger,
J Edward Hu, Ellie Pavlick, Aaron Steven White,
and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018. Towards a
uniﬁed natural language inference framework to
evaluate sentence representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.08207 .
P. Rajpurkar, R. Jia, and P. Liang. 2018. Know
what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions for
SQuAD. In Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL) .
P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang. 2016.
SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine compre-
hension of text. In Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) .
M. Richardson, C. J. Burges, and E. Renshaw. 2013.
Mctest: A challenge dataset for the open-domain
machine comprehension of text. In Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 193–203.
V . Rus and C. G. Arthur. 2009. The question generation
shared task and evaluation challenge. In The Univer-
sity of Memphis. National Science Foundation .
M. Tapaswi, Y . Zhu, R. Stiefelhagen, A. Torralba,
R. Urtasun, and S. Fidler. 2016. Movieqa: Un-
derstanding stories in movies through question-
answering. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR) , pages 4631–4640.
A. Trischler, T. Wang, X. Yuan, J. Harris, A. Sordoni,
P. Bachman, and K. Suleman. 2017. NewsQA: A
machine comprehension dataset. In Workshop on
Representation Learning for NLP .
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit,
L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin.
2017. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03762 .
Aaron Steven White, Pushpendre Rastogi, Kevin Duh,
and Benjamin Van Durme. 2017. Inference is ev-
erything: Recasting semantic resources into a uni-
ﬁed evaluation framework. In Proceedings of the
Eighth International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , vol-
ume 1, pages 996–1005.
A. Williams, N. Nangia, and S. R. Bowman. 2017.
A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence
understanding through inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.05426 .
L. Yu, J. Buys, and P. Blunsom. 2016. Online seg-
ment to segment neural transduction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08194 .