Title: Dynamic Planning in Open-Ended Dialogue using Reinforcement Learning

Dynamic Planning in Open-Ended Dialogue using
Reinforcement Learning
Deborah Cohen, Moonkyung Ryu, Yinlam Chow, Orgad Keller, Ido Greenberg, Avinatan Hassidim,
Michael Fink, Yossi Matias, Idan Szpektor, Craig Boutilier, Gal Elidan
{debbycohen,mkryu,yinlamchow,orgad,idogreenberg,avinatan,fink,yossi,szpektor,cboutilier,elidan}@google.com
Google Research
ABSTRACT
Despite recent advances in natural language understanding and
generation, and decades of research on the development of con-
versational bots, building automated agents that can carry on rich
open-ended conversations with humans “in the wild” remains a for-
midable challenge. In this work we develop a real-time, open-ended
dialogue system that uses reinforcement learning (RL) to power
a bot’s conversational skill at scale. Our work pairs the succinct
embedding of the conversation state generated using SOTA (super-
vised) language models with RL techniques that are particularly
suited to a dynamic action space that changes as the conversation
progresses. Trained using crowd-sourced data, our novel system is
able to substantially exceeds the (strong) baseline supervised model
with respect to several metrics of interest in a live experiment with
real users of the Google Assistant.
1 INTRODUCTION
With tremendous advances in AI and ML techniques to recognize
speech and perform high quality natural language understanding
(NLU) and generation (NLG), increased attention is being directed
toward the task of carrying out real-time, rich conversations be-
tween humans and bots (e.g., [ 19,32,46]). Realistic interactions
generally span complex topic spaces and are relatively open-ended,
and often have an underlying goal (e.g., task completion, knowl-
edge sharing). Thus, carrying them out effectively requires not just
powerful bots that learn to generate favorable responses, but also
demands that bots have the ability to plan and adapt on the fly.
The framework of reinforcement learning (RL) is a natural ap-
proach for this task. Indeed, research on Markov decision processes
(MDPs) and RL for spoken-dialogue systems spans well over two
decades, ranging from early work using MDPs and RL [ 18,35], to
methods based on partially observable MDP (POMDP) models (e.g.,
[42]), to more recent approaches adopting deep learning represen-
tations (e.g., [ 19]). Despite this, deployments of RL “in the wild” in
large-scale dialogue systems, such as smart assistants like Alexa,
Siri or Google Assistant, are rare (though exceptions exist, e.g., [ 32];
see Related Work below). Indeed, building such systems remains a
formidable challenge.
Aside from the infrastructure hurdles associated with scalable,
real-time systems, there are inherent modeling challenges when
building open-ended conversational bots. First, the state space of
such bots is massive, even within specific verticals, and care is
needed to craft effective state representations for RL algorithms.
Second, the action space is also in principle “unbounded,” and impos-
ing reasonable limitations on actions comes with its own difficulties,
including the fact that the set of candidate actions may vary as theconversation progresses. Finally, the design of suitable reward func-
tions for open-ended dialogue can be quite subtle. In this work, we
rely on crowd-sourced labels.
We present a real-time, open-ended dialogue system that uses
RL to power a bot’s conversational skill at scale. We address the
challenges above using a novel RL construction. We first exploit
powerful supervised models—specifically, RNNs and transformers—
to provide a succinct embedding of the conversation state. Second,
we use the fact that a relatively small set of “reasonable” candidate
actions can be generated at each conversation turn [ 38]. From an
RL perspective, this can be viewed as a stochastic realization of
the full action space, so we use an RL approach tailored to such
stochastic action sets [3]. We also explore the use of alternative
SOTA RL techniques and training methods, including continuous-
action optimization [ 29], conservative Q-learning [ 17] and novel
off-policy evaluation algorithms [28].
We first evaluate our methods using offline data. We then de-
scribe the deployment of our system “in the wild” in the Google
Assistant, specifically as part of the animal domain experience de-
scribed by Szpektor et al . [38] . We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our RL-based approach at dynamic planning and driving open-
ended dialogue: relative to a SOTA non-RL (transformer) baseline,
our bot substantially improves a number of key metrics, including
conversation length, cooperative responses and explicit positive
feedback. We perform a novel and extensive comparison of many
RL architectures in real-world settings and generate unique insights
into their relative performance. An example dialogue is shown in
Fig. 1, showcasing the rich pivoting of our best-performing RL
model vs. the supervised approach. Our model, now deployed in
the Google Assistant, marks an important milestone in the use of
RL for driving real-time, engaging, open-ended, conversations.
The key ingredients and insights of our approach are threefold.
First, we use an effective representation of the RL state, leveraging
pre-trained supervised models that encode the conversation his-
tory. Second, we limit the action space to a small set of generated
candidate actions while allowing multiple actions in a single turn
to compose rich bot responses. This granularity decouples content
generation and dialogue planning. Finally, we adapt recent state-
of-the-art RL algorithms that are well-suited to our dynamic action
space to the candidate-generation decomposition we adopt here.
2 RELATED WORK
The use of RL for dialogue dates back more than two decades.
Statistical research focuses on task-oriented dialogues and uses
MDPs [ 18,35,36,41] or POMDPs [ 42,44]. Henderson et al . [11]
introduce function approximation to reduce the resulting large
slot-filling state space. Casanueva et al . [4] propose a feudal RLarXiv:2208.02294v1  [cs.CL]  25 Jul 2022
Cohen et al.
(a) RL model
(b) Supervised model
Figure 1: Example conversations conducted by (a) an RL
model and (b) a supervised model, previously deployed in
the Google Assistant, showcasing the rich pivoting of the RL
model vs. the supervised approach.
model which decomposes the decision by first selecting a subset of
primitive actions, then choosing the actual action. These methods
each model the state and action spaces using handcrafted semantic
representations, such as slots and dialogue acts. This restricts such
approaches to simple domains with limited slot-filling.More recent work leverages deep neural networks (DNNs) to
obviate the need for these so-called summary states and actions
[9]. Fatemi et al . [8] consider a low-dimensional continuous-valued
state space. Liu et al . [23] encode the dialogue state using an RNN
but translate the representation to slot-value pairs. In both cases,
the action space is restricted to a small number of dialogue acts and
the approaches remain limited to specific task-based domains, with
no clear extension to open-ended dialogues.
Building on advances in neural generative models, another line
of work applies RL to directly learn a response generation model
conditioned on the dialogue history. Actions are often defined at the
word level, so the action space is the entire vocabulary [ 14,19,20,
33]. This approach suffers from several drawbacks: the action space
is very large; word-level RL performs credit assignment poorly at an
unnatural level for dialogue planning; and this may affect decoder
performance, leading to incomprehensible utterances [45].
Related approaches model actions as latent variables, inducing
a latent action space, thus decoupling the discourse-level decision
making from NLG [ 30,45]. However, they focus on specific domains
(e.g., price negotiation, slot-filling or chitchat) rather than grounded
open-ended dialogues. Serban et al . [32] proposed MILABOT, as
part of the Amazon Alexa Prize competition, where a DM selects
a response from several generated candidates. Our approach is
similar in spirit, but allows one to combine several candidates in the
same bot turn to compose a richer response. This seemingly small
difference is vitally important as it allows our RL model to make
decisions at an effective granularity. We note that while MILABOT
was restricted to an A/B testing evaluation within a competition,
our RL model is deployed in the Google Assistant.
3 DYNAMIC COMPOSITION
In this work, we build on the dynamic composition approach intro-
duced by Szpektor et al . [38] . This dialogue management model
limits the action space using specific content providers to propose
candidate utterances, which are dynamically selected by the di-
alogue manager (DM) . We adopt this scheme to manage action
complexity in our RL approaches.
Dynamic composition decouples content (utterance) generation
from selection. Given candidate utterances proposed by each of
several providers, the DM scores and selects a suitable utterance
as (part of) a response given the current conversation history. The
bot response can be composed of several utterances, which are
generated and selected sequentially and dynamically (see Fig. 2).
Additional components include an NLU module and a sentence
fusion module that merges the selected utterances into a coherent
response. We describe each of these components in turn.
Natural Language Understanding. At each turn of the conver-
sation, user input is analyzed by an NLU module, comprising two
components: a focus tracker and a user answer interpreter . The focus
of the conversation is the set of entities currently being discussed.
If the last turn ended with a bot question, the answer interpreter
classifies the user answer w.r.t. the question type. For example, the
response types expected for yes/no questions (e.g., “Do you want
to hear more about cheetahs?”), are ‘yes’ (e.g., “sure,” “I want to
hear about cheetahs”), ’no’, and ignoring the question; list selection
questions (e.g., “Which animal do you want to hear about next?”)
Dynamic Planning in Open-Ended Dialogue using Reinforcement Learning
Figure 2: Dynamic composition flow diagram. A few candidates from different providers are shown in each step and the one
selected by the DM is highlighted in blue.
Dialogue Focus User Answer Interp. Dialogue Act
User Sound of a polar bear polar bear
Bot Here’s a polar bear <SOUND>. polar bear Sound
Hey, do you want to hear the sound of a penguin? penguin Focus change + Yes/no question
User Yes penguin cooperation
Bot Great. penguin Ack
This is a penguin <SOUND>. penguin Sound
Which animal do you want to learn about next? Open question
User Tell me about polar bears polar bear cooperation
Bot Cool. polar bear Ack
Churchillwild.com says that "Polar bears will wag
their heads from side-to-side when they want to play". polar bear Fact
Table 1: Illustration of the concepts of focus, user answer interpretation and dialog acts for a sample conversation.
and quizzes (e.g.,“Can you guess which animal this is, a lion or a
tiger?”) include animals as potential responses. Table 1 illustrates
the concepts of focus and answer interpretation.
Content Providers. Given the conversation history and the se-
lected utterances so far in the current turn, content providers pro-
pose candidate utterances w.r.t. this context. They rely on different
sources (e.g., news, knowledge graph) to extract relevant content,
which includes both structured and unstructured data. Structured
providers generate text for their candidate utterances using tem-
plates, while unstructured content is quoted verbatim with attribu-
tion. Content is expressed in different forms via dialogue acts such
as statements, preference queries, navigation questions and quizzes.
Some of these, referred to as conversational drivers , aim to proac-
tively increase user engagement (e.g., focus changing, questions).
Examples of such dialogue acts are provided in Table 1.
Dialogue Manager. In each step of the bot composition loop,
providers generate candidates for the next utterance to be appended
to the response constructed so far. Given a set of candidates and
the conversation context, utterance selection is performed by a
learned DM. This step is repeated until the DM assesses that the
response is a relevant and engaging bot response. In [ 38], the DM
is implemented as an RNN encoder, trained in a supervised fashion
(see Sec. 4.2). In this work, we develop DMs trained using RL.
Sentence Fusion. The output of the composition loop is a sequence
of utterances, which still needs to be fused into a coherent bot
response. Simple concatenation of the utterances typically results
in cumbersome, unnatural, verbose responses, such as “On average,male lions weigh 420 lbs. On average, male lions are 3.9 feet tall.
That means that lions are about as tall as a piano.” Sentence fusion
combines the selected utterances into a single cohesive response
[2,10,25], such as “On average, male lions weigh 420 lbs and are
3.9 feet tall. That means that they’re about as tall as a piano.” This
module uses the following techniques: (a) pronominalization, (b)
removal of repetitive context mentions and (c) introduction of a
discourse marker between sentences. Our fusion model is based
on LaserTagger [ 24], a sequence labeling architecture in which
each token in the input text is classified to be either copied as-is,
deleted or substituted with a phrase taken from a small, predefined
vocabulary, typically containing pronouns and connectives.
4 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR THE DM
Dynamic composition is realized by Szpektor et al . [38] with super-
vised training of an RNN-based DM. This limits the construction
of the next bot response to be myopic , as it is optimized for maxi-
malimmediate reward. However, since the main goal of the DM is
to conduct complex, engaging multi-turn conversations, it should
target the natural complexity of human-to-human conversations,
which are typically not conducted in a myopic, turn-by-turn man-
ner, but rather reflect some degree of look ahead and dynamic
planning. For example, a conversation may comprise several steps
leading to an intended goal, such as knowledge transfer; or to make
a conversation more engaging, one might intersperse interesting
facts throughout, or build tension towards an eventual resolution.
Such capabilities require a bot be able to choose responses that lead
Cohen et al.
toward such non-myopic ends, and adapt to user responses/queries
by dynamically re-planning its trajectory accordingly.
To this end, we develop an RL framework for open-ended di-
alogue that builds on the dynamic composition architecture, and
propose a number of concrete instantiations of it. In Sec. 4.1, we for-
mulate the underlying MDP that captures the spirit of the content-
provider decomposition. In Sec. 4.2, we discuss the use of the under-
lying supervised model for state representation. We then propose a
two-step Q-learning approach in Sec. 4.3, with algorithmic variants
motivated by specific properties of the MDP and our representa-
tions. We also develop an end-to-end Q-learning method in Sec. 4.4
that does not require the language encoders for state generation.
4.1 MDP with a Stochastic Action Space
We begin with an MDP formulation of the DM problem upon which
our RL methods operate. We assume a state space X, action space
A, transition kernel 𝑃, reward function 𝑅, initial state distribution
𝛽and discount factor 𝛾, and aim to optimize the cumulative dis-
counted return 𝐽(𝜋):=E[Í∞
𝑡=0𝛾𝑡𝑟𝑡|𝑃,𝑅,𝛽,𝜋]which captures
the long-term value of the conversation. The RL DM policy𝜋is an
action distribution conditioned on state 𝑥∈X. An optimal DM 𝜋∗
is found by solving max𝜋∈Π𝐽(𝜋), where Πis the space of all DM
policies. We discuss each of these elements in turn.
Much RL research in dialogue management defines the state
and action spaces to be the tokenized language space [ 1,13,19].
For instance, the state 𝑥is the tokenized user-agent conversation
history to that point, while an action 𝑎is the DM’s output sen-
tence (generated token by token). However, since the state and
action spaces in this formulation are both combinatorial, even with
a medium-sized vocabulary the corresponding tokenized spaces
grow exponentially, thus making RL intractable. We handle the com-
binatorics of state space by leveraging state-of-the-art language
models, such as RNNs or transformers, to encode conversation
history𝑥with a𝑑-dimensional embedding 𝜙𝑥∈R𝑑(see Sec. 4.2
for details), thus replacing the large discrete state space by the
continuous embedding space R𝑑.
We also differ from typical RL dialogue models in our treatment
of the action space. Rather than a generative language model that
directly outputs sentences, we leverage the dynamic composition
framework (Sec. 3) to render the action space tractable. Specifically,
at any turn, each content provider proposes a small set of utterances.
This dynamic-composition, content-provider (DCCP) action decom-
position ensures the DM policy need only score and select from a
(relatively small) discrete set A𝑥at state𝑥, i.e. the set of candidate
utterances. Note that by working at the utterance level rather than
at the level of the full bot response (a fused concatenation of K such
utterances), we remove the small-scale combinatorics of the action
space, at the cost of extending the horizon of the RL problem. But
this does not sacrifice the optimality of the policy.
Importantly, since the providers use potentially arbitrary logic
to generate candidates, the realization of A𝑥may differ with each
occurrence of 𝑥. This puts us in the realm of non-standard MDPswith stochastic action sets [3]. Fortunately, we consider Q-learning
methods below that handle this directly.1
The training data, further described in Sec. 4.5, is composed of
crowd-sourced conversations, generated with a supervised DM.
The human evaluators provide a rating for each selected utterance,
which are used as rewards that measure the rater’s immediate value
of the action given the conversation history. As we shall see, the RL
model is able to leverage these to learn dynamic planning strategies
to improve user engagement.
In the existing dialogue RL literature [ 6,19,22] most algorithms
are based on policy-gradient methods [ 37] because (i) learning an
optimal state-action value function with a combinatorial action
space is intractable, and (ii) the resulting DM is a sequence-to-
sequence policy model that generates bot responses. The simplifica-
tion of the action space afforded by our DCCP reformulation allows
us to use value-based Q-learning [ 3,27], a relatively uncommon
approach in large-scale dialogue systems.
4.2 Supervised Model as a State Encoder
To encode the conversation history into a 𝑑-dimensional embed-
ding vector, we consider two supervised learning architectures: an
improved version of the RNN model from [ 38] and a transformer-
based approach using a pre-trained BERT model.
Supervised RNN Architecture. We modify the two-level hierar-
chical RNN encoder [ 38] by replacing the first-level gated recur-
rent unit (GRU), that encodes the user and bot utterances, by a
pre-trained sentence embedding module [ 5], which is fixed dur-
ing training. These provide a clear advantage over the first-level
GRU, which we attribute to training on a large, general corpus. The
resulting sentence embeddings are fed to a GRU along with non-
textual metadata features, including: the conversation turn index,
the candidate dialogue act, the number of tokens in the constructed
response, whether the candidate offers to change the focus.
Supervised Transformer-based Architecture. Our second su-
pervised model uses a transformer architecture [ 40]. We consider
two variants: a text-only BERT model and a combined text-metadata
model. In both, the input is the concatenated sequence of user and
bot utterances (i.e., conversation history) and a candidate utterance
to be scored. In the second, we concatenate the per-token contex-
tual representation vectors produced by the BERT model and an
embedded representation of the metadata features for the utterance
of which the token is a part. The resulting concatenated vectors
are fed into another small transformer. Experiments on manually
annotated data show the text-only variant outperforms the second,
corroborating the hypothesis that the transformer’s better use of
the input text—specifically, the ability to attend to the history when
processing candidates—obviates the need for additional features.
State Representation. Our state representation uses the output
of the dialogue-history encoder, either the RNN hidden state or the
pooled output of the last transformer layer. The state is constructed
by concatenating this encoding with the sentence embedding of
the last user input and context features, e.g., the conversation turn
index and the composition turn step index.
1We note that the DCCP action decomposition is related to certain hierarchical ap-
proaches to RL, such as feudal RL [ 4,7], and to mixtures-of-experts [ 12,16], though
our DM RL methods do not influence the training of the providers.
Dynamic Planning in Open-Ended Dialogue using Reinforcement Learning
Figure 3: Two-step Q-learning schema. The state is the con-
catenation of (i) the output of the dialogue history encoder,
either RNN or transformer (denoted by (1)), (ii) the embed-
ding of the last user input and (iii) context features, includ-
ing the conversation turn index and the composition turn
step index. The action is represented by its embedding. We
consider both stochastic action and continuous action Q-
learning approaches (denoted by (2)) potentially with the
added CQL regularization (denoted by (3)).
4.3 The Two Step Q-model Architecture
We now develop several RL approaches for the DM which rely on
Q-learning. Our first approaches use a two-step model in which
the state is first encoded by a language model (either a pre-trained
RNN or transformer) before being passed to the DM policy. Figure 3
illustrates how these building blocks come together in the two-step
approach. Given a pre-trained state encoder 𝜙:X→ R𝑑and a
sentence encoder 𝜓:A→ Rℎ, we apply two different Q-learning
techniques using the encoded state space (using 𝜙𝑥rather than 𝑥)
and action space (using 𝜓𝑎rather than 𝑎).
Stochastic Action Q-learning (SAQL) [3]. Our first RL technique
applies Q-learning directly to the discrete, stochastic action sets A𝑥
as determined by the DCCP decompostion. We adopt the general
deep Q network (DQN) approach [ 27], using a DNN to represent the
Q-function. Specifically, 𝑄𝜃:R𝑑×Rℎ→Ris a feed-forward DNN
with parameters 𝜃, which represents the cumulative discounted
value of taking action (or bot utterance) 𝜓𝑎∈Rℎin state (i.e.,
conversation history encoding) 𝜙𝑥∈R𝑑.
We train the model using batched conversation data of the form
𝐵={(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎𝑖,𝑟𝑖,𝜙𝑥′
𝑖,A𝑥′
𝑖)}𝑖(see Sec. 4.5 on data generation),
where the𝑖th data point includes: the embedded state 𝜙𝑥𝑖and
action𝜓𝑎𝑖at some conversation turn, the observed next state 𝜙𝑥′
𝑖,
the realized reward 𝑟𝑖, and the set of actions A𝑥′
𝑖made available
by the content providers at the next state. This latter component is
non-standard in DQN, but necessary due to the stochastic nature of
the action sets—training the Q-function (see below) exploits maxi-
mization over the realized set of candidate actions generated by our
providers at the next state, an approach shown to be sound in [3].
We learn𝜃by minimizing the mean squared Bellman error :
min
𝜃|𝐵|∑︁
𝑖=1(𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎𝑖)−𝑟𝑖−𝛾max
𝑎′∈A𝑥′
𝑖𝑄𝜃target(𝜙𝑥′
𝑖,𝜓𝑎′))2,
where𝑄𝜃targetis atarget𝑄-function, used to improve training sta-
bility in DQN [ 26] (note the use of the realized action set A𝑥′
𝑖inthe maximization). Under this loss, RL is ℓ2-regression of 𝑄𝜃w.r.t.
target labels 𝑟+𝛾max𝑎′∈A𝑥′
𝑖𝑄𝜃target(𝜙𝑥′,𝜓𝑎′), which tries to match
the value function 𝑄𝜃with its Bellman backup.
We refer to this approach as stochastic action Q-learning (SAQL)
to reflect the stochastic action sets used in training. Once SAQL
converges, the DM policy is 𝜋∗(𝑥) ∈ arg max𝑎∈A𝑥𝑄𝜃∗(𝜙𝑥,𝜓𝑎),.
That is, at inference time, the 𝑄-model is applied to each candidate
action, and the DM responds with the action with the greatest
Q-value given the current dialogue state.
Continuous Action Q-learning (CAQL) [29]. In the SAQL for-
mulation, action maximization takes place over the discrete set
of candidatesA𝑥. However, the embedding representation means
that the action space can also be treated as continuous, and we can
consider maximization over this wider space. Continuous-action
RL problems are common in areas like robotics [15], and typically
policy-gradient algorithms are used to learn a return-maximizing
policy [ 34,37]. However, such methods are often data-inefficient
and impractical when faced with high-dimensional action spaces,
both issues present in dialogue systems. Instead, we consider the use
ofcontinuous action Q-learning (CAQL) [29] to solve the continuous-
action variant of our DM policy.
Roughly speaking, using CAQL, when faced with a next state 𝑥′
while training the Q-function 𝑄𝜃, we do not restrict ourselves to
maximizing over the discrete action set A(𝑥′), but instead maxi-
mize over the entire embedding space 𝜓, minimizing:
min
𝜃|𝐵|∑︁
𝑖=1(𝑟𝑖+𝛾𝑄𝜃target(𝜙𝑥′
𝑖,arg max
𝜓𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥′
𝑖,𝜓))−𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎𝑖))2.
This approach has advantages over 𝑆𝐴𝑄𝐿 : one need not record the
realizationA𝑥′of the stochastic action sets in the data set, and
continuous action maximization (see below) can be more effective
when the set of candidate actions (utterances) is moderate or large
in size. However, CAQL will generally overestimate the true value of
its policy, since it hypothesizes the use of embedded actions that are
never generated by any content provider. Indeed, once 𝑄𝜃is trained
using CAQL, we restrict the realized policy to scoring (and using)
only provider-generated candidate actions at inference/serving
time.
When𝑄𝜃is represented by a DNN, the inner maximization is
typically differentiable and non-convex. This can be solved opti-
mally for certain classes of DNNs using a mixed-integer program
or a first-order method such as gradient ascent (GA) [ 29]. We use
GA in this work: starting from an initial embedded action 𝜓(0), the
optimal embedded action arg max𝜓𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥′,𝜓)is computed itera-
tively by𝜓(𝑡+1)←𝜓(𝑡)+𝜖GA∇𝜓𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥′,𝜓)|𝜓=𝜓(𝑡), where𝜖GA>0
is a tunable step size.
Conservative Q-learning (CQL) [17]. Our DM problem is an ap-
plication of offline RL , where a model is learned using previously
collected user-bot conversation with no further (online) interac-
tion. Offline RL is prone to overestimation errors induced by the
distributional shift between the offline data and that generated by
the learned policy [ 43]. This is especially problematic if certain bot
actions are rare in the offline data, making their learned 𝑄-values
very noisy. To alleviate this, we can apply conservative 𝑄-learning
(CQL) [17], a regularization scheme which learns a “conservative”
Cohen et al.
𝑄-function that lower bounds the true Q-function. CQL can be
applied to both SAQL and CAQL (we illustrate it only for SAQL).
In CQL one augments the Q-learning loss with a behavior reg-
ularizer: min𝜃Í|𝐵|
𝑖=1𝛼(E𝑎∼𝜇[𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎)]−E𝑎∼𝜋𝛽[𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎)])+
(𝑟𝑖+𝛾𝑄𝜃target(𝜙𝑥′
𝑖,arg max𝑎′∈A(𝑥′
𝑖)𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥′
𝑖,𝜓𝑎′))−𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎𝑖))2,
where𝜋𝛽is a behavior policy (DM) that approximates the data-
generation policy,2𝛼>0is a tunable regularization parameter, and
𝜇is the target policy to be learned. Intuitively, CQL regularization
minimizes the differences in Q-values of actions generated by our
learned RL DM policy and the behavior (training-data generating)
policy. We use target 𝜇(𝑎|𝑥)∝exp(𝑄𝜃(𝜙𝑥,𝜓𝑎)), which corresponds
to the optimal policy of entropy-regularized Q-learning [31].
4.4 End-to-end Architecture
We now outline an end-to-end (E2E) RL approach that jointly trains
the language encoder and the 𝑄-function. In contrast to our two-
step approaches, by not constraining the DM to using a pre-trained
encoder, E2E RL can tune the encoder (hence its representations)
to the dialogue task at hand. This approach is similar in spirit to
the original DQN model [ 27], in which the 𝑄-network consists of
both a convolutional DNN that encodes pixel frames (states) and a
feed-forward NN that learns the Q-values.
To learn the 𝑄-function in E2E fashion, we apply DQN to 𝑄(𝑥,𝑎)=
𝑄𝜃(𝑐(𝑥,𝑎)), where𝑐(𝑥,𝑎)is the concatenation of the conversation
history and the current candidate action, and 𝑄𝜃:X → Ris
a trainable language encoder (e.g., a transformer initialized with
pre-trained weights), followed by a feed-forward DNN. This 𝑄-
model jointly encodes the raw input conversation and assigns a
𝑄-value to each candidate action. This allows us to learn the 𝑄-
function E2E, without relying on fixed pretrained language en-
coders. Specifically, with target network 𝑄𝜃targetupdated as above,
in E2E learning we train the 𝑄𝜃by minimizing the mean squared
Bellman error. We use SAQL and formulate the inner maximization
asmax𝑎′∈A(𝑥′)𝑄𝜃target(𝑥′,𝑎′).
4.5 Training Data
The DM models are trained on crowd-sourced data, generated by
human evaluators. Each evaluator converses with the bot until
the dialogue derails or comes to a natural end. They then rate
the bot responses, assessing each utterance in the composition
loop, including those selected and unselected by the DM. Although
evaluators were provided with a set of guidelines for assessing
bot response quality, the resulting data is noisy and some level of
rater-specific subjectivity is included in the ratings.
A dozen evaluators generated ∼20K conversations with an aver-
age of 3bot responses, each with 1to4utterances, and with up to
30candidates per utterance. For the supervised models, this results
in∼1.5M training examples, as each (selected and unselected) can-
didate corrresponds to a training example. By contrast, RL models
only use the labels on selected candidates, giving 150K labels.
Each candidate utterance is rated on a scale of -3 to 7, with no 0
rating made available. The negative ratings reflect candidates that
do not reply to a user question, are out of context, or repeat content
2In our setting, the behavior policy 𝜋𝛽is simply the supervised DM model.that was already mentioned in the conversation. The positive scores
correspond to candidates that fit the conversation context well.
5 INITIAL OFFLINE & ONLINE EVALUATION
Before deploying our models in live experiment, we conducted
preliminary evaluation of our RL-based DM policies. We describe
both (i) off-policy counterfactual inference [ 21,39] evaluation and
(ii)on-policy human (rater) evaluation. Off-policy evaluation can be
performed on the existing datasets used to train our models (in our
case, generated with the supervised DM). While often easier—hence
especially useful for initial model development and tuning—it is
less reliable than on-policy evaluation. So we use both methods.
DM Models. We evaluate the following variants of our SAQL and
CAQL algorithms, using either the supervised RNN or transformer
for state representation, with or without CQL regularization. SAQL-
RNN, CAQL-RNN, SAQL-Transformer, and CAQL-Transformer are
the Q-learned models trained with the two-step RL approaches
SAQL and CAQL using RNN and transformer encoders, respec-
tively. SAQL-Reg-RNN, CAQL-Reg-RNN, SAQL-Reg-Transformer,
and CAQL-Reg-Transformer are the same Q-learned models trained
with CQL regularization. SAQL-Reg-E2E denotes the E2E Q-learned
model with CQL regularization.
The RNN architecture includes a GRU layer with 200 units.
The supervised transformer model uses the publicly-available, pre-
trained BERT-Medium checkpoint.3The training regime roughly
follows that for BERT.4For RL models, we use a discount factor
𝛾=0.95for SAQL,𝛾=0.9for CAQL and CQL Reg, and 𝛾=0.8for
E2E RL,5and a fully connected feedforward DNN for the 𝑄-function.
Hyper-parameters are provided in the appendix.
DM Off-policy Evaluation. The main goal of off-policy evalua-
tion is to assess the performance of our RL-based DM policy using
existing conversational data. Unlike (supervised) myopic models,
RL requires evaluating the reward of full trajectories. Since an RL-
based DM can drive sequential conversations that follow a very
different distribution than that of the training data, off-policy cor-
rection using propensity scoring or related methods is needed [ 39].
We use DualDICE [28] for this purpose, a recent SOTA method for
off-policy estimation of RL policy values that directly estimates the
stationary distribution correction ratio , i.e., the ratio of the steady-
state probabilities of specific state-action pairs (𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜙𝑎𝑖)generated
by the RL policy 𝜋and the data-generating (or behavior) policy
𝜋𝐵(which can be estimated from the training data). We provide a
high-level overview.
Given a batch 𝐵={(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎𝑖,𝑟𝑖,𝜙𝑥′
𝑖)}𝑖of (embedded conversa-
tion history) training data and a DM policy 𝜋, DualDICE learns a
feed-forward DNN 𝜈𝜌:R𝑑×Rℎ→R, parameterized by 𝜌, where
𝜈𝜌(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎𝑖)is a proto-value function whose Bellman residuals are
estimates of the required stationary distribution ratios [ 28]. Given a
trained𝜈𝜌, the value of the RL-based DM’s policy 𝜋can be estimated
by𝐽DD(𝜋𝜆):=Í|𝐵|
𝑖=1𝑟𝑖·(𝜈𝜌∗(𝜙𝑥𝑖,𝜓𝑎𝑖)−𝛾𝜋𝜆(𝑎′
𝑖|𝑥′
𝑖)
𝜋𝐵(𝑎′
𝑖|𝑥′
𝑖)𝜈𝜌∗(𝜙𝑥′
𝑖,𝜓𝑎′
𝑖)).
Notice that this estimator assumes the knowledge of the behavior
(data-generating) policy 𝜋𝐵(which is the supervised DM in our
3https://github.com/google-research/bert
4https://github.com/google-research/bert/blob/master/optimization.py
5The choices of these discount factors are mainly to ensure training stability.
Dynamic Planning in Open-Ended Dialogue using Reinforcement Learning
Model Type Model On-policy Off-policy
Supervised RNN 5.75±1.99 5.28±0.44
Transformer 5.67±2.18 4.55±0.37
Stochastic RNN 5.17±2.29 5.13±0.52
Actions Reg-RNN 6.48±1.13 5.51±0.39
Transformer 5.71±2.26 4.76±0.40
Reg-Transformer 5.58±2.02 4.73±0.45
Continuous RNN 6.04±1.63 5.49±0.41
Actions Transformer 5.86±1.79 4.91±0.38
Reg-Transformer 5.46±2.25 4.78±0.46
E2E Reg-Transformer 6.53±1.44−−
Table 2: Off-policy and on-policy raters evaluation results.
setting). However, since the supervised DM is trained to optimize
for a myopic reward, it can be overly deterministic. This can drive
large fluctuations in propensity scores 𝜋/𝜋𝐵, and high variance in
𝐽DD. Instead, we use a behavior-agnostic form of DualDICE which
requires no estimation of 𝜋𝐵(see [28] for details).
The off-policy evaluation results generated by DualDICE are
presented in Table 2 (second column). Since our use of DualDICE
depends on language encoders 𝜙and𝜓, it cannot be used to evalu-
ate the E2E model.6Note that our off-policy value estimates of the
RNN-based and the transformer-based models are generated using
an RNN-based and a transformer-based behavior policy, respec-
tively. DualDice off-policy results show that SAQL-Reg-RNN and
CAQL-RNN are among the best-performing RL-based policies (this
coincides with on-policy evaluation results, see below). The offline
performance of RNN-based models is consistently better than that
of transformer-based models. This too is somewhat corroborated
by on-policy evaluation, though this performance difference may
be due in part to proto-function approximation error in DualDice
caused by the inherent bias of the transformer-based data.
DM On-policy Evaluation. We next conducted on-policy evalua-
tion. Human evaluators were asked to conduct dialogues with our
bot and rate the overall conversation experience on the same -3 to 7
scale used to collect training data. Evaluation was blind—evaluators
did not know which model they were conversing with. Overall 200
dialogues for each model were rated. The results are presented in
Table 2 (first column). SAQL-Reg-E2E and SAQL-Reg-RNN received
the highest rating while SAQL-RNN performed worst. Notice that
the models rated best by evaluators are trained with lower discount
factors. We conjecture raters may be inherently biased to value my-
opic quality.7We also note the high-variance in rater evaluations
across all models (a point discussed further below).
6 LIVE EXPERIMENT
Evaluation by human raters facilitates policy assessment in con-
trolled settings and is necessary before deployment in a user-facing
commercial product. However, dedicated human evaluators typi-
cally behave differently than real users. Specifically, the impact of
6Extending DualDICE to evaluate E2E models requires a much more complex dual-
function parameterization and will be left as future work.
7The RL models trained with lower discount factors behave closer to the supervised
DM. Their DualDice estimates have lower variance and also tend to perform better.conversation planning might be quite different with raters vs. real
users. For example, raters might continue a conversation even after
it reaches an awkward stage or they might not reflect a potential
increase in user engagement after a successful focus change initi-
ated by the bot. To gain an in-depth understanding of their impact
on real users, we conducted a live experiment with our RL models.
The Q-learning model that achieved the largest improvement in
terms of user engagement was then fully deployed in the Google
Assistant.
6.1 Experimental Setup
To conduct a live experiment, we build on the dynamic composi-
tionbot from [ 38] (Sec. 3). This bot is integrated with the Google
Assistant, dubbed the assistant below, and interacts with users in a
real-time online setting.
The experiment was conducted using an A/B testing protocol, in
which a small percentage of assistant users were randomly sampled
to interact with the bot using an RL-based DM while other users
(same percentage) interact with the vanilla bot using a supervised
DM. More precisely, the experiment was conducted with one con-
trol arm, with the transformer-based supervised model, and eight
experiment arms with the architectures listed in Sec. 5. We use
the supervised transformer model as a baseline as it was shown to
outperform the supervised RNN in a previous live experiment.
Our experiment spanned the months of December 2021 and Jan-
uary 2022, during which user assignment to control/experiments
remained constant. The experiment was transparent to the users,
who could not distinguish between the different DMs. A conversa-
tion starts when a user triggers the experience by asking an animal
related query (e.g., “how does a lion sound?”). Once initiated, a
conversation with a user could end if the bot predicted that its
response is not of sufficient quality (i.e., the DM score is too low),
if the user issued a query outside of the animal domain (e.g., about
the weather), or if the user issued a standard stop command. The
last two options were handled by the assistant.
6.2 Evaluation Metrics
We measured daily user interaction with the assistant in the animal
domain in both the experiment and control arms. To assess user
engagement, we use several surrogate metrics that are directly
measurable in the interaction logs. We define a conversation to be
the succession of user and bot turns, starting with a triggering user
turn. The conversation length is the number of turns (combined user
and bot turns) in a conversation. We consider followup feedback
after each bot response, where followup refers to the next query, if
any, after the bot response. Specifically, we distinguish:
•Cooperative responses to bot questions, such as “yes” in re-
sponse to a question proposing additional content (e.g., “do
you want to hear more?”) or “Tell me about lions” in response
to a list selection question (e.g., “which animal do you want
to hear about next?”).
•Non-cooperative responses to bot questions, such as “no” in
response to a question proposing additional content (e.g.,
“do you want to learn about cheetahs?”).
•Explicit positive feedback , which captures followup user queries
with explicit gratitude, e.g., “ thank you ” or “ wonderful ”.
Cohen et al.
Table 3: Mean relative change of experiment vs. the control metrics. Here, T stands for transformer; green changes are desirable,
red changes less so (to varying degrees).
.Metric SAQL-RNN SAQL-T CAQL-RNN CAQL-T SAQL-Reg-E2E
Conversation length +30% +23% +14% +18% -0.7%
Cooperative response +8% -6.8% -5.8% -4% -8%
Non-cooperative response +112% +178% +54% +120% +41%
Explicit positive feedback +32% +9.7% -20% +6.8% -6%
Explicit negative feedback -18% +8.6% +1% -14% +27%
•Explicit negative feedback , reflecting followup user queries
that contain negative feedback, such as “ stop” or “ shut up ”.
For the last two metrics, we use predefined lists of positive and
negative feedback phrases collected from user logs.
6.3 Main Results
The average relative change in metrics across all experiments w.r.t.
the control is shown in Table 3 (for CQL variants, see Table 4 in the
appendix). Interestingly, these results differ from the rater online
evaluations in Table 2, demonstrating the substantial distinction be-
tween the behaviors of raters and real users. This discrepancy may
be, in part, due to the high variance in rater evaluations. Surpris-
ingly, SAQL-Reg-E2E performs worst and is slightly outperformed
by the supervised baseline. The E2E model behaves quite conser-
vatively, similar to a supervised model, avoiding pivoting to other
animals and changing the type of offered content (e.g., sounds, facts,
quizzes). Such conservative behavior may be caused by the lower
discount factor 𝛾=0.8used, making its expected trajectory horizon
shorter. This might be preferred by raters who tend to evaluate
bot responses more myopically; but at the same time, it provides a
more boring, less engaging experience for users. The different SAQL
models outperform their CAQL counterparts. A similar conclusion
was drawn in [ 45], where discrete latent actions were deemed to
be more suitable than continuous actions for dialogue agents.
Overall, we find that SAQL-RNN performs best w.r.t. our main
metrics, conducting longer, more engaging conversations. It in-
creases conversation length by 32%, while also increasing user
engagement as captured by multiple metrics. We see an increase of
8%in cooperative responses to bot questions. While there is also
a large increase of non-cooperative responses ( 112% ), this is ex-
pected as the SAQL-RNN agent takes more risks by asking pivoting
questions, generating many more occasions for non-cooperative
user reactions. While the user may not be interested in the con-
versational direction proposed by the bot (e.g., pivoting to another
animal), the user often continues engaging in a dialogue about ani-
mals. For example, in Fig. 1a, the user provides a non-cooperative
answer in the 3rd turn. As a result, the bot modifies its plan and
asks the user to choose the next conversation focus, to which the
user responds positively. In addition, some followup user queries
contain explicit positive or negative feedback. While an order of
magnitude fewer than other followups, they offer a direct mea-
sure of user (dis)satisfaction. SAQL-RNN increases explicit positive
feedback by 32%and reduces negative feedback by 18%.
Our CQL variants of the different models indeed behave more
“conservatively,” closer to supervised model behavior. This translates
into smaller changes in conversation length and user feedbackmetrics (see appendix). Interestingly, using the transformer (vs.
RNN) state encoding does not improve SAQL performance, unlike in
the supervised setting, where transformer-based candidate selection
is superior: the RNN state representation seems sufficient for RL.
For this reason, we focus our analysis on SAQL-RNN below.
6.4 Qualitative Analysis of the RL DM
To improve user engagement while conducting longer conversa-
tions, SAQL-RNN uses several planning strategies. First, it ends
20%more turns in questions relative to the control, prompting the
user to choose additional content (e.g., learn more animal facts,
hear another animal sound). While we observe an increase in co-
operative responses, the cooperation rate to bot questions drops by
9.5%. Although this may seem problematic, this is actually a result
of a favorable policy learned by our bot: by taking more risks in
eliciting a user’s preference for the next steps, SAQL-RNN achieves
an overall improved user experience, as measured via increased
conversation length, combined with a noticeable increase in explicit
positive feedback and a decrease in negative feedback.
A second planning strategy is to better exploit content diversity,
including facts, sounds, quizzes, yes/no questions, open questions,
etc. On average, SAQL-RNN uses 26%more unique providers per
conversation than the supervised transformer-based model.
Two additional planning strategies are related to the existence of
two sub-dialogues with different characteristics. Dialogues around
animal sounds are poorer in content and exhibit entity pivoting
at every turn (after playing the sound of a given animal, we can
either suggest the sound of a different animal or quiz the user about
other animal sounds). In contrast, dialogues around animal facts
typically contain richer content and a greater conversation depth.
We observe that SAQL-RNN favors the richer experience of the
latter, selecting 31%more fact-related content.
Lastly, we observe that the average conversation breadth of
dialogues conducted by SAQL-RNN is lower (it generates 13%fewer
focus-pivoting turns). This is a consequence of fact dialogues having
less breadth. However, when restricting analysis to fact dialogues,
SAQL-RNN exhibits 60%more focus-pivoting turns.
Some of these strategies are exemplified by the sample conver-
sation in Fig. 1a, generated by the SAQL-RNN model, which we
contrast with Fig.1b, conducted by the supervised transformer. Both
conversations start with the same 2 turns. In the 3rd turn, after
a non-cooperative user response, the transformer pivots back to
sounds to maximize “immediate” user interest. By contrast, the RL
model tries to pivot to facts for a richer conversational experience,
suggesting that the user choose the next animal. We also observe
Dynamic Planning in Open-Ended Dialogue using Reinforcement Learning
that the RL conversation includes more types of content, such as
sounds, facts, quizzes, yes/no and open questions.
7 CONCLUSION
In this work we tackled the formidable task of building a rich, open-
ended conversational bot that is deployed in the challenging setting
of a real-time, global commercial assistant. Our approach relies
on the framework of reinforcement learning, using a novel state
representation based on the succinct embedding of a supervised
language model and an RL algorithm that allows for a dynamic
action space at each stage of the conversation. Ours is one of the
few examples of RL-based conversational systems deployed in the
wild at scale, and the substantial advantages demonstrated over the
SOTA supervised model validates the decades-long premise that
the dynamic planning ability of RL is a natural fit for the design of
rich dialogue agents.
An interesting insight from our live experiment highlights the
power of RL to take counter-intuitive actions: an increase in non-
cooperative responses, a seemingly negative phenomenon, is simply
a tool with which the agent may elicit a user’s preference for the
next phase of the conversation. This leads to a positive conversa-
tional experience on average, with a measurable increase both in
conversation length and positive feedback. We hope to discover
other dialogue strategies that drive “great” conversations as we
shift to learning models directly from rich user signals.
REFERENCES
[1]K. Asadi and J. D. Williams. 2016. Sample-efficient deep reinforcement learning
for dialog control. arXiv:1612.06000 (2016).
[2]R. Barzilay and K. R. McKeown. 2005. Sentence fusion for multidocument news
summarization. Comp. Linguistics 31, 3 (2005), 297–328.
[3] C. Boutilier, A. Cohen, A. Hassidim, Y. Mansour, O. Meshi, M. Mladenov, and D.
Schuurmans. 2018. Planning and learning with stochastic action sets. In Proc. of
the 27th International Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence . 4674–4682.
[4]I. Casanueva, P. Budzianowski, S. Ultes, F. Kreyssig, B.-H. Tseng, Y.-C. Wu, and M.
Gasic. 2018. Feudal dialogue management with jointly learned feature extractors.
InProc. of the 19th Annual SIGDIAL Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue . 332–337.
[5]D. Cer, Y. Yang, S. Kong, N. Hua, N. Limtiaco, R. S. John, N. Constant, M. Guajardo-
Cespedes, S. Yuan, C. Tar, Y. Sung, B. Strope, and R. Kurzweil. 2018. Universal
Sentence Encoder. arXiv:1803.11175 (2018).
[6]S. Chandramohan, M. Geist, and O. Pietquin. 2010. Sparse approximate dynamic
programming for dialog management. In Proc. of the SIGDIAL 2010 Conf. 107–115.
[7]P. Dayan and G. E. Hinton. 1996. Varieties of Helmholtz machine. Neural Networks
9, 8 (1996), 1385–1403.
[8]M. Fatemi, L. E. Asri, H. Schulz, J. He, and K. Suleman. 2016. Policy networks
with two-stage training for dialogue systems. arXiv:1606.03152 (2016).
[9]M. Gašić, F. Jurčíček, B. Thomson, K. Yu, and S. Young. 2011. On-line policy
optimisation of spoken dialogue systems via live interaction with human subjects.
InIEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition & Understanding . 312–317.
[10] M. Geva, E. Malmi, I. Szpektor, and J. Berant. 2019. DiscoFuse: A Large-Scale
Dataset for Discourse-Based Sentence Fusion. In Proc. of the 2019 Conf. of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Comp. Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies . 3443–3455.
[11] J. Henderson, O. Lemon, and K. Georgila. 2008. Hybrid reinforcement/supervised
learning of dialogue policies from fixed data sets. Comp. Linguistics 34, 4 (2008),
487–511.
[12] R. A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, and G. E. Hinton. 1991. Adaptive mixtures
of local experts. Neural computation 3, 1 (1991), 79–87.
[13] N. Jaques, A. Ghandeharioun, J. H. Shen, C. Ferguson, A. Lapedriza, N. Jones, S.
Gu, and R. Picard. 2019. Way off-policy batch deep reinforcement learning of
implicit human preferences in dialog. arXiv:1907.00456 (2019).
[14] N. Jaques, J. H. Shen, A. Ghandeharioun, C. Ferguson, A. Lapedriza, N. Jones, S. S.
Gu, and R. Picard. 2020. Human-centric dialog training via offline reinforcement
learning. arXiv:2010.05848 (2020).
[15] J. Kober and J. Peters. 2011. Policy search for motor primitives in robotics.
Machine learning 84, 1 (2011), 171–203.[16] S. Kotsiantis and P. Pintelas. 2003. Mixture of expert agents for handling imbal-
anced data sets. Annals of Math., Comp. & Teleinformatics 1, 1 (2003), 46–55.
[17] A. Kumar, A. Zhou, G. Tucker, and S. Levine. 2020. Conservative Q-Learning for
Offline Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 1179–1191.
[18] E. Levin, R. Pieraccini, and W. Eckert. 1997. Learning dialogue strategies within
the Markov decision process framework. In 1997 IEEE Workshop on Automatic
Speech Recognition and Understanding Proc. 72–79.
[19] J. Li, W. Monroe, A. Ritter, M. Galley, J. Gao, and D. Jurafsky. 2016. Deep rein-
forcement learning for dialogue generation. arXiv:1606.01541 (2016).
[20] J. Li, W. Monroe, T. Shi, S. Jean, A. Ritter, and D. Jurafsky. 2017. Adversarial
learning for neural dialogue generation. arXiv:1701.06547 (2017).
[21] L. Li, W. Chu, J. Langford, T. Moon, and X. Wang. 2012. An unbiased offline
evaluation of contextual bandit algorithms with generalized linear models. In
Proc. of the Workshop on On-line Trading of Exploration and Exploitation 2 . 19–36.
[22] L. Li, J. D. Williams, and S. Balakrishnan. 2009. Reinforcement learning for dialog
management using least-squares policy iteration and fast feature selection. In
10th Annual Conf. of the International Speech Communication Association .
[23] B. Liu, G. Tur, D. Hakkani-Tur, P. Shah, and L. Heck. 2018. Dialogue learning with
human teaching and feedback in end-to-end trainable task-oriented dialogue
systems. arXiv:1804.06512 (2018).
[24] E. Malmi, S. Krause, S. Rothe, D. Mirylenka, and A. Severyn. 2019. Encode,
Tag, Realize: High-Precision Text Editing. In Proc. of the 2019 Conf. on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conf. on
Natural Language Processing . Association for Comp. Linguistics, 5053–5064.
[25] E. Marsi and E. Krahmer. 2005. Explorations in Sentence Fusion. In Proc. of the
Tenth European Workshop on Natural Language Generation .
[26] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley, D. Silver, and K.
Kavukcuoglu. 2016. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In
International Conf. on machine learning . PMLR, 1928–1937.
[27] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M.
Riedmiller. 2013. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1312.5602
(2013).
[28] O. Nachum, Y. Chow, B. Dai, and L. Li. 2019. Dualdice: Behavior-agnostic esti-
mation of discounted stationary distribution corrections. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 32 (2019).
[29] M. Ryu, Y. Chow, R. Anderson, C. Tjandraatmadja, and C. Boutilier. 2019. CAQL:
Continuous Action Q-Learning. In International Conf. on Learning Representa-
tions .
[30] A. Saleh, N. Jaques, A. Ghandeharioun, J. Shen, and R. Picard. 2020. Hierarchical
reinforcement learning for open-domain dialog. In Proc. of the AAAI Conf. on
Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 34. 8741–8748.
[31] J. Schulman, X. Chen, and P. Abbeel. 2017. Equivalence between policy gradients
and soft q-learning. arXiv:1704.06440 (2017).
[32] I. V. Serban, C. Sankar, M. Germain, S. Zhang, Z. Lin, S. Subramanian, T. Kim, M.
Pieper, S. Chandar, N. R. Ke, S. Mudumba, A. de Brébisson, J. Sotelo, D. Suhubdy,
V. Michalski, A. Nguyen, J. Pineau, and Y. Bengio. 2017. A Deep Reinforcement
Learning Chatbot. arXiv:1709.02349 (2017).
[33] J. Shin, P. Xu, A. Madotto, and P. Fung. 2020. Generating empathetic responses
by looking ahead the user’s sentiment. In IEEE International Conf. on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . 7989–7993.
[34] D. Silver, G. Lever, N. Heess, T. Degris, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller. 2014.
Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In Conf. on machine learning .
[35] S. Singh, M. Kearns, D. Litman, and M. Walker. 1999. Reinforcement Learning
for Spoken Dialogue Systems. In Proc. of the 12th International Conf. on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS’99) . MIT Press, 956–962.
[36] S. Singh, D. Litman, M. Kearns, and M. Walker. 2002. Optimizing dialogue
management with reinforcement learning: Experiments with the NJFun system.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 16 (2002), 105–133.
[37] R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour. 1999. Policy gradient
methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in
neural information processing systems 12 (1999).
[38] I. Szpektor, D. Cohen, G. Elidan, M. Fink, A. Hassidim, O. Keller, S. Kulkarni, E.
Ofek, S. Pudinsky, A. Revach, et al .2020. Dynamic composition for conversational
domain exploration. In Proc. of The Web Conf. 2020 . 872–883.
[39] P. Thomas, G. Theocharous, and M. Ghavamzadeh. 2015. High-confidence off-
policy evaluation. In Proc. of the AAAI Conf. on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 29.
[40] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser,
and I. Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All you Need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 30 . 5998–6008.
[41] M. A. Walker. 2000. An application of reinforcement learning to dialogue strategy
selection in a spoken dialogue system for email. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research 12 (2000), 387–416.
[42] J. D. Williams and S. Young. 2007. Partially observable Markov decision processes
for spoken dialog systems. Computer Speech & Language 21, 2 (2007), 393–422.
[43] Y. Wu, G. Tucker, and O. Nachum. 2019. Behavior regularized offline reinforce-
ment learning. arXiv:1911.11361 (2019).
Cohen et al.
[44] S. Young, M. Gašić, S. Keizer, F. Mairesse, J. Schatzmann, B. Thomson, and K. Yu.
2010. The hidden information state model: A practical framework for POMDP-
based spoken dialogue management. Computer Speech & Language (2010).
[45] T. Zhao, K. Xie, and M. Eskenazi. 2019. Rethinking Action Spaces for Reinforce-
ment Learning in End-to-end Dialog Agents with Latent Variable Models. In
Proc. of the 2019 Conf. of the North American Chapter of the Association for Comp.
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies . 1208–1218.
[46] L. Zhou, J. Gao, D. Li, and H.-Y. Shum. 2020. The design and implementation of
xiaoice, an empathetic social chatbot. Comp. Linguistics 46, 1 (2020), 53–93.A APPENDIX
A.1 DM Training Hyper-Parameters
Our supervised and RL models were trained with the following
hyper-parameters.
The supervised RNN model is trained with a learning rate of
0.0001, batch size of 16, a dropout probability of 0.2 and 200K train-
ing steps. Its architecture includes a GRU layer with 200 units.
For the supervised transformer model, we use the BERT-Medium
checkpoint8having uncased vocabulary, hidden dimension 𝐻=512,
𝐿=8transformer layers, and 𝐴=8attention heads per layer. This
model was trained for 20000 steps with a global batch size of 768
divided among 8TPUv3 chips, using the Adam optimizer with an
initial learning rate of 𝜖=5·10−5(decayed to zero), 𝛽1=0.9,
𝛽2=0.999, and𝜖=10−6.
For the RL models, SAQL-RNN, CAQL-RNN, SAQL-Reg-RNN,
and CAQL-Reg-RNN use a fully connected feedforward network
for𝑄-function approximation. These networks are composed of 3
layers and each layer is composed of 1024 RELU units. The SAQL-
RNN network is trained using a learning rate 𝜖=7·10−5and𝑘=2𝑀
steps. Warmstarted with the SAQL-RNN weights, the SAQL-Reg-
RNN network is trained with 𝜖=5·10−6and𝑘=2.4𝑀. The
CAQL-RNN network is trained with 𝜖=5·10−5and𝑘=2𝑀, where
the inner maximization problem uses a GA learning rate of 𝜖GA=1·
10−6and runs for a maximum of 𝑘GA=25steps. Warmstarted with
the CAQL-RNN weights, the CAQL-Reg-RNN network is trained
with𝜖=3·10−6and𝑘=2𝑀. SAQL-Transformer, SAQL-Reg-
Transformer, CAQL-Transformer, and CAQL-Reg-Transformer all
follow almost the same settings as SAQL-RNN, SAQL-Reg-RNN,
CAQL-RNN, and CAQL-Reg-RNN but are trained with 𝜖=3·10−4
and𝑘=4𝑀,𝜖=1·10−5and𝑘=2.5𝑀,𝜖=3·10−5and𝑘=3𝑀,
𝜖=1·10−5and𝑘=3𝑀respectively. The models are trained with
batch size|𝐵|=32, and in all two-step CQL regularized models
the regularization coefficient 𝛼is0.1.9SAQL-Reg-E2E was trained
with𝑘=320,000,𝜖=5·10−5,|𝐵|=48,𝛾=0.8and𝛼=0.01. All
these hyper-parameters are chosen from the best settings of their
corresponding grid-search optimization.
A.2 Full Live Experiment Results
The average relative change in the live experiment metrics of the
experiments w.r.t the control is shown in Table 4 for all models,
including the CQL variants.
8https://github.com/google-research/bert
9Compared with learning rates, tuning 𝛼does not have much effect on model training.
Dynamic Planning in Open-Ended Dialogue using Reinforcement Learning
Table 4: Mean relative change of experiments vs. the control metrics. Here, T stands for transformer.
Metric SAQL-RNN SAQL-Reg-RNN SAQL-T SAQL-Reg-T CAQL-RNN CAQL-T CAQL-Reg-T SAQL-Reg-E2E
Conversation length +30% +3.6% +23% +19% +14% +18% +8.9% -0.7%
Cooperative response +8% -20% -6.8% -0.3% -5.8% -4% -4.3% -8%
Non-cooperative response +112% +75% +178% +125% +54% +120% +130% +41%
Explicit positive feedback +32% +42% +9.7% +0.4% -20% +6.8% +5.8% -6%
Explicit negative feedback -18% -7% +8.6% -7.7% +1% -14% +15% +27%