Title: Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review

Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
Han Xu1Yao Ma2Haochen Liu3Debayan Deb4Hui Liu5Jiliang Tang6Anil K. Jain7
Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNN) have achieved un-
precedented success in numerous machine learn-
ing tasks in various domains. However, the exis-
tence of adversarial examples has raised concerns
about applying deep learning to safety-critical ap-
plications. As a result, we have witnessed increas-
ing interests in studying attack and defense mech-
anisms for DNN models on different data types,
such as images, graphs and text. Thus, it is neces-
sary to provide a systematic and comprehensive
overview of the main threats of attacks and the
success of corresponding countermeasures. In this
survey, we review the state of the art algorithms
for generating adversarial examples and the coun-
termeasures against adversarial examples, for the
three popular data types, i.e., images, graphs and
text.
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become increasingly popular
and successful in many machine learning tasks. They have
been deployed in different recognition problems in the do-
mains of images, graphs, text and speech, with remark-
able success. In the image recognition domain, they are
able to recognize objects with near-human level accuracy
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016). They are also
used in speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), natural lan-
guage processing (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and
for playing games (Silver et al., 2016a).
Because of these accomplishments, deep learning tech-
niques are also applied in safety-critical tasks. For example,
in autonomous vehicles, deep convolutional neural networks
1Michigan State University, fxuhan1@msu.edug
2Michigan State University, fmayao4@msu.edug
3Michigan State University, fliuhaoc1@msu.edu g
4Michigan State University, fdebdebay@msu.edu g
5Michigan State University, fliuhui7@msu.edug
6Michigan State University, ftangjili@msu.edug
7Michigan State University, fjain@egr.msu.edug(CNNs) are used to recognize road signs (Cire s ¸An et al.,
2012). The machine learning technique used here is re-
quired to be highly accurate, stable and reliable. But, what
if the CNN model fails to recognize the “STOP” sign by the
roadside and the vehicle keeps going? It will be a dangerous
situation. Similarly, in ﬁnancial fraud detection systems,
companies frequently use graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) to decide whether their
customers are trustworthy or not. If there are fraudsters
disguising their personal identity information to evade the
company’s detection, it will cause a huge loss to the com-
pany. Therefore, the safety issues of deep neural networks
have become a major concern.
In recent years, many works (Szegedy et al., 2013; Good-
fellow et al., 2014b; He et al., 2016) have shown that DNN
models are vulnerable to adversarial examples, which can
be formally deﬁned as – “Adversarial examples are inputs
to machine learning models that an attacker intentionally
designed to cause the model to make mistakes. ” In the image
classiﬁcation domain, these adversarial examples are inten-
tionally synthesized images which look almost exactly the
same as the original images (see ﬁgure 2), but can mislead
the classiﬁer to provide wrong prediction outputs. For a
well-trained DNN image classiﬁer on the MNIST dataset,
almost all the digit samples can be attacked by an impercep-
tible perturbation, added on the original image. Meanwhile,
in other application domains involving graphs, text or audio,
similar adversarial attacking schemes also exist to confuse
deep learning models. For example, perturbing only a cou-
ple of edges can mislead graph neural networks (Z ¨ugner
et al., 2018), and inserting typos to a sentence can fool text
classiﬁcation or dialogue systems (Ebrahimi et al., 2017).
As a result, the existence of adversarial examples in all ap-
plication ﬁelds has cautioned researchers against directly
adopting DNNs in safety-critical machine learning tasks.
To deal with the threat of adversarial examples, studies
have been published with the aim of ﬁnding countermea-
sures to protect deep neural networks. These approaches
can be roughly categorized to three main types: (a) Gradi-
ent Masking (Papernot et al., 2016b; Athalye et al., 2018):
since most attacking algorithms are based on the gradient
information of the classiﬁers, masking or obfuscating the
gradients will confuse the attack mechanisms. (b) Robust
Optimization (Madry et al., 2017; Kurakin et al., 2016b):arXiv:1909.08072v2  [cs.LG]  9 Oct 2019
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
these studies show how to train a robust classiﬁer that can
correctly classify the adversarial examples. (c) Adversary
Detection (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a; Xu et al., 2017): the
approaches attempt to check whether a sample is benign or
adversarial before feeding it to the deep learning models.
It can be seen as a method of guarding against adversarial
examples. These methods improve DNN’s resistance to
adversarial examples.
In addition to building safe and reliable DNN models, study-
ing adversarial examples and their countermeasures is also
beneﬁcial for us to understand the nature of DNNs and con-
sequently improve them. For example, adversarial perturba-
tions are perceptually indistinguishable to human eyes but
can evade DNN’s detection. This suggests that the DNN’s
predictive approach does not align with human reasoning.
There are works (Goodfellow et al., 2014b; Ilyas et al., 2019)
to explain and interpret the existence of adversarial exam-
ples of DNNs, which can help us gain more insight into
DNN models.
In this review, we aim to summarize and discuss the main
studies dealing with adversarial examples and their counter-
measures. We provide a systematic and comprehensive re-
view on the start-of-the-art algorithms from images, graphs
and text domain, which gives an overview of the main tech-
niques and contributions to adversarial attacks and defenses.
The main structure of this survey is as follows:
In Section 2, we introduce some important deﬁnitions and
concepts which are frequently used in adversarial attacks
and their defenses. It also gives a basic taxonomy of the
types of attacks and defenses. In Section 3 and Section
4, we discuss main attack and defense techniques in the
image classiﬁcation scenario. We use Section 5 to brieﬂy
introduce some studies which try to explain the phenomenon
of adversarial examples. Section 6 and Section 7 review the
studies in graph and text data, respectively.
2. Deﬁnitions and Notations
In this section, we give a brief introduction to the key com-
ponents of model attacks and defenses. We hope that our
explanations can help our audience to understand the main
components of the related works on adversarial attacks and
their countermeasures. By answering the following ques-
tions, we deﬁne the main terminology:
Adversary’s Goal (2.1.1)
What is the goal or purpose of the attacker? Does
he want to misguide the classiﬁer’s decision on one
sample, or inﬂuence the overall performance of the
classiﬁer?
Adversary’s Knowledge (2.1.2)
What information is available to the attacker? Does
he know the classiﬁer’s structure, its parameters or thetraining set used for classiﬁer training?
Victim Models (2.1.3)
What kind of deep learning models do adversaries usu-
ally attack? Why are adversaries interested in attacking
these models?
Security Evaluation (2.2)
How can we evaluate the safety of a victim model when
faced with adversarial examples? What is the relation-
ship and difference between these security metrics and
other model goodness metrics, such as accuracy or
risks?
2.1. Threat Model
2.1.1. A DVERSARY ’SGOAL
Poisoning Attack vs Evasion Attack
Poisoning attacks refer to the attacking algorithms that
allow an attacker to insert/modify several fake samples
into the training database of a DNN algorithm. These
fake samples can cause failures of the trained classi-
ﬁer. They can result in the poor accuracy (Biggio et al.,
2012), or wrong prediction on some given test samples
(Z¨ugner et al., 2018). This type of attacks frequently
appears in the situation where the adversary has ac-
cess to the training database. For example, web-based
repositories and “honeypots” often collect malware ex-
amples for training, which provides an opportunity for
adversaries to poison the data.
In evasion attacks, the classiﬁers are ﬁxed and usually
have good performance on benign testing samples. The
adversaries do not have authority to change the classi-
ﬁer or its parameters, but they craft some fake samples
that the classiﬁer cannot recognize. In other words,
the adversaries generate some fraudulent examples to
evade detection by the classiﬁer. For example, in au-
tonomous driving vehicles, sticking a few pieces of
tapes on the stop signs can confuse the vehicle’s road
sign recognizer (Eykholt et al., 2017).
Targeted Attack vs Non-Targeted Attack
In targeted attack, when the victim sample (x;y)is
given, where xis feature vector and y2 Y is the
ground truth label of x, the adversary aims to induce
the classiﬁer to give a speciﬁc label t2Y to the per-
turbed sample x0. For example, a fraudster is likely to
attack a ﬁnancial company’s credit evaluation model
to disguise himself as a highly credible client of this
company.
If there is no speciﬁed target label tfor the victim
samplex, the attack is called non-targeted attack. The
adversary only wants the classiﬁer to predict incor-
rectly.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
2.1.2. A DVERSARY ’SKNOWLEDGE
White-Box Attack
In a white-box setting, the adversary has access to all
the information of the target neural network, including
its architecture, parameters, gradients, etc. The adver-
sary can make full use of the network information to
carefully craft adversarial examples. White-box attacks
have been extensively studied because the disclosure
of model architecture and parameters helps people un-
derstand the weakness of DNN models clearly and it
can be analyzed mathematically. As stated by (Tram `er
et al., 2017), security against white-box attacks is the
property that we desire ML models to have.
Black-Box Attack
In a black-box attack setting, the inner conﬁguration of
DNN models is unavailable to adversaries. Adversaries
can only feed the input data and query the outputs of
the models. They usually attack the models by keeping
feeding samples to the box and observing the output
to exploit the model’s input-output relationship, and
identity its weakness. Compared to white-box attacks,
black-box attacks are more practical in applications
because model designers usually do not open source
their model parameters for proprietary reasons.
Semi-white (Gray) Box Attack
In a semi-white box or gray box attack setting, the
attacker trains a generative model for producing ad-
versarial examples in a white-box setting. Once the
generative model is trained, the attacker does not need
victim model anymore, and can craft adversarial exam-
ples in a black-box setting.
2.1.3. V ICTIM MODELS
We brieﬂy summarize the machine learning models which
are susceptible to adversarial examples, and some popular
deep learning architectures used in image, graph and text
data domains. In our review, we mainly discuss studies of
adversarial examples for deep neural networks.
AConventional Machine Learning Models
For conventional machine learning tools, there is a
long history of studying safety issues. Biggio et al.
(2013) attack SVM classiﬁers and fully-connected shal-
low neural networks for the MNIST dataset. Barreno
et al. (2010) examine the security of SpamBayes, a
Bayesian method based spam detection software. In
(Dalvi et al., 2004), the security of Naive Bayes clas-
siﬁers is checked. Many of these ideas and strategies
have been adopted in the study of adversarial attacks
in deep neural networks.BDeep Neural Networks
Different from traditional machine learning techniques
which require domain knowledge and manual feature
engineering, DNNs are end-to-end learning algorithms.
The models use raw data directly as input to the model,
and learn objects’ underlying structures and attributes.
The end-to-end architecture of DNNs makes it easy
for adversaries to exploit their weakness, and generate
high-quality deceptive inputs (adversarial examples).
Moreover, because of the implicit nature of DNNs,
some of their properties are still not well understood or
interpretable. Therefore, studying the security issues of
DNN models is necessary. Next, we’ll brieﬂy introduce
some popular victim deep learning models which are
used as “benchmark” models in attack/defense studies.
(a)Fully-Connected Neural Networks
Fully-connected neural networks (FC) are com-
posed of layers of artiﬁcial neurons. In each layer,
the neurons take the input from previous layers,
process it with the activation function and send it
to the next layer; the input of ﬁrst layer is sample
x, and the (softmax) output of last layer is the
scoreF(x). Anm-layer fully connected neural
network can be formed as:
z(0)=x;z(l+1)=(Wlzl+bl):
One thing to note is that, the back-propagation
algorithm helps calculate@F(x;)
@, which makes
gradient descent effective in learning parameters.
In adversarial learning, back-propagation also fa-
cilitates the calculation of the term:@F(x;)
@x, rep-
resenting the output’s response to a change in
input. This term is widely used in the studies to
craft adversarial examples.
(b)Convolutional Neural Networks
In computer vision tasks, Convolutional Neural
Networks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) is one of the
most widely used models. CNN models aggregate
the local features from the image to learn the rep-
resentations of image objects. CNN models can
be viewed as a sparse-version of fully connected
neural networks: most of the weights between
layers are zero. Its training algorithm or gradi-
ents calculation can also be inherited from fully
connected neural networks.
(c)Graph Convolutional Networks
The work of (Kipf & Welling, 2016) introduces
the graph convolutional networks, which later
became a popular node classiﬁcation model for
graph data. The idea of graph convolutional net-
works is similar to CNN: it aggregates the infor-
mation from neighbor nodes to learn represen-
tations for each node v, and outputs the score
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
F(v;X)for prediction:
H(0)=X;H(l+1)=(^AH(l)Wl):
whereXdenotes the input graph’s feature ma-
trix, and ^Adepends on graph degree matrix and
adjacency matrix.
(d)Recurrent Neural Networks
Recurrent Neural Networks are very useful for
tackling sequential data. As a result, they are
widely used in natural language processing. The
RNN models, especially LSTM(Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997), are able to store the pre-
vious time information in memory, and exploit
useful information from previous sequence for
next-step prediction.
2.2. Security Evaluation
We also need to evaluate the model’s resistance to adversar-
ial examples. “Robustness” and “Adversarial Risk” are two
terms used to describe this resistance of DNN models to one
single sample, and the total population, respectively.
2.2.1. R OBUSTNESS
Deﬁnition 1. (minimal perturbation) : Given the classiﬁer
Fand data (x;y), the adversarial perturbation has the least
norm (the most unnoticeable perturbation):
min= arg min
jjjjsubject toF(x+)6=y:
Here,jjjj usually refers to lpnorm.
Deﬁnition 2. (robustness) : The norm of minimal perturba-
tion:
r(x;F) =jjminjj:
Deﬁnition 3. (global robustness) : The expectation of ro-
bustness over the whole population D:
(F) =E
xDr(x;F):
The minimal perturbation can ﬁnd the adversarial example
which is most similar to xunder the model F. Therefore, the
largerr(x;F)or(F)is, the adversary needs to sacriﬁce
more similarity to generate adversarial samples, implying
that the classiﬁer Fis more robust or safe.
2.2.2. A DVERSARIAL RISK(LOSS)
Deﬁnition 4. (Most-Adversarial Example) Given the clas-
siﬁerFand datax, the sample xadvwith the largest loss
value inx’s-neighbor ball:
xadv= arg max
x0L(x0;F)subject tojjx0 xjj:Deﬁnition 5. (Adversarial Loss) : The loss value for the
most-adversarial example:
Ladv(x) =L(xadv) = max
jjx0 xjj<L(;x0;y)
Deﬁnition 6. (global adversarial loss) : The expectation of
the loss value on xadvover the data distribution D:
Radv(F) =E
xDmax
jjx0 xjj<L(;x0;y) (1)
The most-adversarial example is the point where the model
is most likely to be fooled in the neighborhood of x. A
lower loss valueLadvindicates a more robust model F.
2.2.3. A DVERSARIAL RISK VS RISK
The deﬁnition of Adversarial Risk is drawn from the deﬁni-
tion of classiﬁer risk (empirical risk):
R(F) =E
xDL(;x;y )
Risk studies a classiﬁer’s performance on samples from nat-
ural distributionD. Whereas, adversarial risk from Equation
(1) studies a classiﬁer’s performance on adversarial example
x0. It is important to note that x0may not necessarily follow
the distributionD. Thus, the studies on adversarial examples
are different from these on model generalization. Moreover,
a number of studies reported the relation between these two
properties (Tsipras et al., 2018; Su et al., 2018; Stutz et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2019b). From our clariﬁcation, we hope
that our audience get the difference and relation between
risk and adversarial risk, and the importance of studying
adversarial countermeasures.
2.3. Notations
With the aforementioned deﬁnitions, Table 1 lists the nota-
tions which will be used in the subsequent sections.
3. Generating Adversarial Examples
In this section, we introduce main methods for generating
adversarial examples in the image classiﬁcation domain.
Studying adversarial examples in the image domain is con-
sidered to be essential because: (a) perceptual similarity be-
tween fake and benign images is intuitive to observers, and
(b) image data and image classiﬁers have simpler structure
than other domains, like graph or audio. Thus, many stud-
ies concentrate on attacking image classiﬁers as a standard
case. In this section, we assume that the image classiﬁers
refer to fully connected neural networks and Convolutional
Neural Networks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). The most com-
mon datasets used in these studies include (1) handwritten
letter images dataset MNIST, (2) CIFAR10 object dataset
and (3) ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Next, we go through
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
Notations Description
x Victim data sample
x0Perturbed data sample
 Perturbation
B(x)lp-distance neighbor ball around xwith ra-
dius
D Natural data distribution
jjjjplpnorm
y Samplex’s ground truth label
t Target label t
Y Set of possible labels. Usually we assume
there aremlabels
C Classiﬁer whose output is a label: C(x) =
y
F DNN model which outputs a score vector:
F(x)2[0;1]m
Z Logits: last layer outputs before softmax:
F(x) =softmax (Z(x))
 Activation function used in neural networks
 Parameters of the model F
L Loss function for training. We simplify
L(F(x);y)in the formL(;x;y ).
Table 1. Notations.
some main methods used to generate adversarial image ex-
amples for evasion attack (white-box, black-box, grey-box,
physical-world attack), and poisoning attack settings. Note
that we also summarize all the attack methods in Table A in
the Appendix A.
3.1. White-box Attacks
Generally, in a white-box attack setting, when the classi-
ﬁerC(modelF) and the victim sample (x;y)are given
to the attacker, his goal is to synthesize a fake image x0
perceptually similar to original image xbut it can mislead
the classiﬁer Cto give wrong prediction results. It can be
formulated as:
ﬁndx0satisfyingjjx0 xjj
such thatC(x0) =t6=y
wherejjjj measures the dissimilarity between x0andx,
which is usually lpnorm. Next, we will go through main
methods to realize this formulation.
3.1.1. B IGGIO ’SATTACK
In (Biggio et al., 2013), adversarial examples are generated
on the MNIST dataset targeting conventional machine learn-
ing classiﬁers like SVMs and 3-layer fully-connected neural
networks.
It optimizes the discriminant function to mislead the classi-
ﬁer. For example, on the MNIST dataset, for a linear SVM
Figure 1. Biggio’s attack on SVM classiﬁer for letter recognition.
(Image Credit: (Biggio et al., 2013))
classiﬁer, its discriminant function g(x) =hw;xi+b, will
mark a sample xwith positive value g(x)>0to be in class
“3”, andxwithg(x)0to be in class “not 3”. An example
of this attack is shown in ﬁgure 1.
Suppose we have a sample xwhich is correctly classiﬁed to
be “3”. For this model, Biggio’s attack crafts a new example
x0to minimize the discriminant value g(x0)while keeping
jjx0 xjj1small. Ifg(x0)is negative, the sample is classiﬁed
as “not 3”, but x0is still close to x, so the classiﬁer is fooled.
The studies about adversarial examples for conventional
machine learning models (Dalvi et al., 2004; Biggio et al.,
2012; 2013) have inspired investigations on safety issues of
deep learning models.
3.1.2. S ZEGEDY ’SL-BFGS A TTACK
The work of (Szegedy et al., 2013) is the ﬁrst to attack
deep neural network image classiﬁers. They formulate their
optimization problem as a search for minimal distorted ad-
versarial example x0, with the objective:
minimizejjx x0jj2
2
subject toC(x0) =tandx02[0;1]m(2)
The problem is approximately solved by introducing the
loss function, which results in the following objective:
minimizecjjx x0jj2
2+L(;x0;t)
subject tox02[0;1]m
In the optimization objective of this problem, the ﬁrst term
imposes the similarity between x0andx. The second term
encourages the algorithm to ﬁnd x0which has a small loss
value to label t, so the classiﬁer Cis very likely to predict x0
ast. By continuously changing the value of constant c, they
can ﬁnd anx0which has minimum distance to x, and at the
same time fool the classiﬁer C. To solve this problem, they
implement the L-BFGS (Liu & Nocedal, 1989) algorithm.
3.1.3. F AST GRADIENT SIGNMETHOD
In (Goodfellow et al., 2014b), an one-step method is intro-
duced to fast generate adversarial examples. The formula-
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
Figure 2. By adding an unnoticeable perturbation, “panda” is clas-
siﬁed as “gibbon”. (Image Credit: (Goodfellow et al., 2014b))
tion is:
x0=x+sign(rxL(;x;y ))non-target
x0=x sign(rxL(;x;t )) target on t
For a targeted attack setting, this formulation can be seen as
a one-step of gradient descent to solve the problem:
minimizeL(;x0;t)
subject tojjx0 xjj1andx02[0;1]m(3)
The objective function in (3) searches the point which has
the minimum loss value to label tinx’s-neighbor ball,
which is the location where model Fis most likely to predict
it to the target class t. In this way, the one-step generated
samplex0is also likely to fool the model. An example of
FGSM-generated samples on ImageNet is shown in Figure
2.
Compared to the iterative attack in Section 3.1.2, FGSM is
fast in generating adversarial examples, because it only in-
volves calculating one back-propagation step. Thus, FGSM
addresses the demands of tasks that need to generate a large
amount of adversarial examples. For example, adversarial
training (Kurakin et al., 2016a), uses FGSM to produce
adversarial samples for all instances in the training set.
3.1.4. D EEPFOOL
In (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016), the authors study a clas-
siﬁerF’s decision boundary around data point x. They try
to ﬁnd a path such that xcan go beyond the decision bound-
ary, as shown in ﬁgure 3, so that the classiﬁer will give a
different prediction for x. For example, to attack x0(true
label is digit 4) to digit class 3, the decision boundary is
described asF3=fz:F(x)4 F(x)3= 0g. We denote
f(x) =F(x)4 F(x)3for short. In each attacking step, it
linearizes the decision boundary hyperplane using Taylor ex-
pansionF0
3=fx:f(x)f(x0)+hrxf(x0)(x x0)i=
0g, and calculates the orthogonal vector !fromx0to plane
F0
3. This vector !can be the perturbation that makes x0
go beyond the decision boundary F3. By moving along
the vector!, the algorithm is able to ﬁnd the adversarial
examplex0
0that is classiﬁed to class 3.
(𝑥#′,3)(𝑥#,4)Figure 3. Decision Boundaries: the hyperplane F1(F2orF3)
separates the data points belonging to class 4 and class 1 (class
2 or 3). The sample x0crosses the decision boundary F3, so the
perturbed data x0
0is classiﬁed as class 3. (Image Credit: (Moosavi-
Dezfooli et al., 2016))
The experiments of DeepFool (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al.,
2016) show that for common DNN image classiﬁers, almost
all test samples are very close to their decision boundary.
For a well-trained LeNet classiﬁer on MNIST dataset, over
90% of test samples can be attacked by small perturbations
whosel1norm is below 0.1 where the total range is [0;1].
This suggests that the DNN classiﬁers are not robust to small
perturbations.
3.1.5. J ACOBIAN -BASED SALIENCY MAPATTACK
Jacobian-based Saliency Map Attack (JSMA) (Papernot
et al., 2016a) introduced a method based on calculating the
Jacobian matrix of the score function F. It can be viewed
as a greedy attack algorithm by iteratively manipulating the
pixel which is the most inﬂuential to the model output.
The authors used the Jacobian matrix JF(x) =@F(x)
@x=
f@Fj(x)
@xigijto modelF(x)’s change in response to the
change of its input x. For a targeted attack setting where
the adversary aims to craft an x0that is classiﬁed to the
target classt, they repeatedly search and manipulate pixel
xiwhose increase (decrease) will cause Ft(x)to increase
or decreaseP
j6=tFj(x). As a result, for x, the model will
give it the largest score to label t.
3.1.6. B ASIC ITERATIVE METHOD (BIM) / P ROJECTED
GRADIENT DESCENT (PGD) A TTACK
The Basic Iterative Method was ﬁrst introduced by (Kurakin
et al., 2016a) and (Kurakin et al., 2016b). It is an iterative
version of the one-step attack FGSM in Section 3.1.3. In a
non-targeted setting, it gives an iterative formulation to craft
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
x0:
x0=x
xt+1=Clipx;(xt+sign(rxL(;xt;y)))
Here,Clip denotes the function to project its argument to
the surface of x’s-neighbor ball B(x) :fx0:jjx0 
xjj1g. The step size is usually set to be relatively
small (e.g. 1 unit of pixel change for each pixel), and step
numbers guarantee that the perturbation can reach the border
(e.g.step ==+ 10 ). This iterative attacking method
is also known as Projected Gradient Method (PGD) if the
algorithm is added by a random initialization on x, used in
work (Madry et al., 2017).
This BIM (or PGD) attack heuristically searches the sam-
plesx0which have the largest loss value in the l1ball
around the original sample x. These adversarial examples
are called “most-adversarial” examples: they are the sample
points which are most aggressive and most-likely to fool
the classiﬁers, when the perturbation intensity (its lpnorm)
is limited. Finding these adversarial examples is helpful to
ﬁnd the weaknesses of deep learning models.
3.1.7. C ARLINI & W AGNER ’SATTACK
Carlini and Wagner’s attack (Carlini & Wagner, 2017b)
counterattacks the defense strategy (Papernot et al., 2016b)
which were shown to be successful against FGSM and L-
BFGS attacks. C&W’s attack aims to solve the same prob-
lem as deﬁned in L-BFGS attack (section 3.1.2), namely
trying to ﬁnd the minimally-distorted perturbation (Equation
2).
The authors address the problem (2) by instead solving:
minimizejjx x0jj2
2+cf(x0;t)
subject tox02[0;1]m
wherefis deﬁned as f(x0;t) = (max i6=tZ(x0)i 
Z(x0)t)+. Minimizing f(x0;t)encourages the algorithm
to ﬁnd anx0that has larger score for class tthan any other
label, so that the classiﬁer will predict x0as classt. Next,
by applying a line search on constant c, we can ﬁnd the x0
that has the least distance to x.
The function f(x;y)can also be viewed as a loss function
for data (x;y): it penalizes the situation where there are
some labels iwith scores Z(x)ilarger thanZ(x)y. It can
also be called margin loss function.
The only difference between this formulation and the one
in L-BFGS attack (section 3.1.2) is that C&W’s attack uses
margin loss f(x;t)instead of cross entropy loss L(x;t).
The beneﬁt of using margin loss is that when C(x0) =t,
the margin loss value f(x0;t) = 0 , the algorithm will di-
rectly minimize the distance from x0tox. This procedure ismore efﬁcient for ﬁnding the minimally distorted adversarial
example.
The authors claim their attack is one of the strongest attacks,
breaking many defense strategies which were shown to be
successful. Thus, their attacking method can be used as a
benchmark to examine the safety of DNN classiﬁers or the
quality of other adversarial examples.
3.1.8. G ROUND TRUTH ATTACK
Attacks and defenses keep improving to defeat each other.
In order to end this stalemate, the work of (Carlini et al.,
2017) tries to ﬁnd the “provable strongest attack”. It can be
seen as a method to ﬁnd the theoretical minimally-distorted
adversarial examples.
This attack is based on Reluplex (Katz et al., 2017), an al-
gorithm for verifying the properties of neural networks. It
encodes the model parameters Fand data (x;y)as the sub-
jects of a linear-like programming system, and then solves
the system to check whether there exists an eligible sample
x0inx’s neighbor B(x)that can fool the model. If we
keep reducing the radius of search region B(x)until the
system determines that there does not exist such an x0that
can fool the model, the last found adversarial example is
called the ground truth adversarial example, because it has
been proved to have least dissimilarity with x.
The ground-truth attack is the ﬁrst work to seriously calcu-
late the exact robustness (minimal perturbation) of classi-
ﬁers. However, this method involves using a SMT solver (a
complex algorithm to check the satisﬁability of a series of
theories), which will make it slow and not scalable to large
networks. More recent works (Tjeng et al., 2017; Xiao et al.,
2018c) have improved the efﬁciency of the ground-truth
attack.
3.1.9. O THERlpATTACKS
Previous studies are mostly focused on l2orl1norm-
constrained perturbations. However, there are other papers
which consider other types of lpattacks.
(a)One-pixel Attack . In (Su et al., 2019), it studies a similar
problem as in Section 3.1.2, but constrains the perturbation’s
l0norm. Constraining l0norm of the perturbation x0 xwill
limit the number of pixels that are allowed to be changed.
It shows that: on CIFAR10 dataset, for a well-trained CNN
classiﬁer (e.g. VGG16, which has 85.5% accuracy on test
data), most of the testing samples (63.5%) can be attacked
by changing the value of only one pixel in a non-targeted
setting. This also demonstrates the poor robustness of deep
learning models.
(b)EAD: Elastic-Net Attack . In (Chen et al., 2018), it also
studies a similar problem as in Section 3.1.2, but constrains
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
the perturbations l1andl2norm together. As shown in their
experimental work (Sharma & Chen, 2017), some strong
defense models that aim to reject l1andl2norm attacks
(Madry et al., 2017) are still vulnerable to the l1-based
Elastic-Net attack.
3.1.10. U NIVERSAL ATTACK
Previous methods only consider one speciﬁc targeted victim
samplex. However, the work (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al.,
2017a) devises an algorithm that successfully misleads a
classiﬁer’s decision on almost all testing images. They try
to ﬁnd a perturbation satisfying:
1.jjjjp
2.P
xD(x)(C(x+)6=C(x))1 
This formulation aims to ﬁnd a perturbation such that the
classiﬁer gives wrong decisions on most of the samples.
In their experiments, for example, they successfully ﬁnd a
perturbation that can attack 85.4% of the test samples in the
ILSVRC 2012 (Russakovsky et al., 2015) dataset under a
ResNet-152 (He et al., 2016) classiﬁer.
The existence of “universal” adversarial examples reveals
a DNN classiﬁer’s inherent weakness on all of the input
samples. As claimed in (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017a), it
may suggest the property of geometric correlation among
the high-dimensional decision boundary of classiﬁers.
3.1.11. S PATIALLY TRANSFORMED ATTACK
Traditional adversarial attack algorithms directly modify the
pixel value of an image, which changes the image’s color
intensity. The work (Xiao et al., 2018b) devises another
method, called a Spatially Transformed Attack. They per-
turb the image by doing slight spatial transformation: they
translate, rotate and distort the local image features slightly.
The perturbation is small enough to evade human inspection
but it can fool the classiﬁers. One example is in ﬁgure (4).
Classified as ‘5’Classified as ‘3’
Figure 4. The top part of digit “5”’ is perturbed to be “thicker”. For
the image which was correctly classiﬁed as “5”, after distortion is
now classiﬁed as “3”.
3.1.12. U NRESTRICTED ADVERSARIAL EXAMPLES
Previous attack methods only consider adding unnoticeable
perturbations into images. However, the work (Song et al.,2018) introduces a method to generate unrestricted adversar-
ial examples. These samples do not necessarily look exactly
the same as the victim samples, but are still legitimate sam-
ples for human eyes and can fool the classiﬁer. Previous
successful defense strategies that target perturbation-based
attacks fail to recognize them.
In order to attack a given classiﬁer C, Song et al. pre-
trained an Auxiliary Classiﬁer Generative Adversarial Net-
work (AC-GAN), (Odena et al., 2017), so they can generate
one legitimate sample xfrom a noise vector z0from classy.
Then, to craft an adversarial example, they will ﬁnd a noise
vectorznearz0, but require that the output of AC-GAN
generatorG(z)be wrongly classiﬁed by victim model C.
Becausezis nearz0in the latent space of the AC-GAN,
its output should belong to the same class y. In this way,
the generated sample G(z)is different from x, misleading
classiﬁerF, but it is still a legitimate sample.
3.2. Physical World Attack
All the previously introduced attack methods are applied
digitally, where the adversary supplies input images directly
to the machine learning model. However, this is not always
the case for some scenarios, like those that use cameras,
microphones or other sensors to receive the signals as input.
In this case, can we still attack these systems by generating
physical-world adversarial objects? Recent works show
that such attacks do exist. For example, in (Eykholt et al.,
2017), stickers are attached to road signs that can severely
threaten autonomous cars’ sign recognizer. These kinds of
adversarial objects are more destructive for deep learning
models because they can directly challenge many practical
applications of DNNs, such as face recognition, autonomous
vehicle, etc.
3.2.1. E XPLORING ADVERSARIAL EXAMPLES IN
PHYSICAL WORLD
In (Kurakin et al., 2016b), authors explore the feasibility of
crafting physical adversarial objects, by checking whether
the generated adversarial images (FGSM, BIM) are “robust”
under natural transformation (such as changing viewpoint,
lighting etc.). Here, “robust” means the crafted images
remain adversarial after the transformation. To apply the
transformation, they print out the crafted images, and let test
subjects use cellphones to take photos of these printouts. In
this process, the shooting angle or lighting environment are
not constrained, so the acquired photos are transformed sam-
ples from previously generated adversarial examples. The
experimental results demonstrate that after transformation, a
large portion of these adversarial examples, especially those
generated by FGSM, remain adversarial to the classiﬁer.
These results suggest the possibility of physical adversarial
objects which can fool the sensor under different environ-
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
ments.
3.2.2. E YKHOLT ’SATTACK ON ROAD SIGNS
The work (Eykholt et al., 2017), shown in ﬁgure 5, crafts
physical adversarial objects by “contaminating” road signs
to mislead road sign recognizers. They achieve the attack
by putting stickers on the stop sign in the desired positions.
The approach consists of: (1) Implement l1-norm based
attack (those attacks that constrain jjx0 xjj1) on digital
images of road signs to roughly ﬁnd the region to perturb
(l1attacks render sparse perturbation, which helps to ﬁnd
the attack location). These regions will later be the location
of stickers. (2) Concentrate on the regions found in step 1,
and use anl2-norm based attack to generate the color for
the stickers. (3) Print out the perturbation found in steps 1
and 2, and stick them on road sign. The perturbed stop sign
can confuse an autonomous vehicle from any distance and
viewpoint.
Figure 5. The attacker puts some stickers on a road sign to confuse
an autonomous vehicle’s road sign recognizer from any viewpoint.
(Image Credit: (Eykholt et al., 2017))
3.2.3. A THALYE ’S3D A DVERSARIAL OBJECT
The work (Athalye et al., 2017) reported the ﬁrst work which
successfully crafted physical 3D adversarial objects. As
shown in ﬁgure 6, the authors use 3D-printing to manu-
facture an “adversarial” turtle. To achieve the goal, they
implement a 3D rendering technique. Given a textured 3D
object, they ﬁrst optimize the object’s texture such that the
rendering images are adversarial from any viewpoint. In
this process, they also ensure that the perturbation remains
adversarial under different environments: camera distance,
lighting conditions, rotation and background. After ﬁnding
the perturbation on 3D rendering, they print an instance of
the 3D object.
3.3. Black-Box Attacks
3.3.1. S UBSTITUTE MODEL
The work of (Papernot et al., 2017) was the ﬁrst to intro-
duce an effective algorithm to attack DNN classiﬁers, under
Figure 6. The image classiﬁer fails to correctly recognize the ad-
versarial object, but the original object can be correctly predicted
with 100% accuracy. (Image Credit: (Athalye et al., 2017))
the condition that the adversary has no access to the classi-
ﬁer’s parameters or training set (black-box). An adversary
can only feed input xto obtain the output label yfrom the
classiﬁer. Additionally, the adversary may have only par-
tial knowledge about: (a) the classiﬁer’s data domain (e.g.
handwritten digits, photographs, human faces) and (b) the
architecture of the classiﬁer (e.g., CNNs, RNNs).
The work Papernot et al. (2017) exploits the “transferability”
(section 5.3) property of adversarial examples: a sample x0
can attackF1, it is also likely to attack F2, which has similar
structures to F1. Thus, the authors introduce a method to
train a substitute model F0to imitate the target victim clas-
siﬁerF, and then craft the adversarial example by attacking
substitute model F0. The main steps are as follows:
1. Synthesize Substitute Training Dataset
Make a “replica” training set. For example, to attack
a victim classiﬁer for the hand-written digits recogni-
tion task, make an initial substitute training set by: (a)
requiring samples from test set; or (b) handcrafting
samples.
2. Train the Substitute Model
Feed the substitute training dataset Xinto the victim
classiﬁer to obtain their labels Y. Choose one substi-
tute DNN model to train on (X;Y )to getF0. Based
on the attacker’s knowledge, the chosen DNN should
have similar structures to the victim model.
3. Augment Dataset
Augment the dataset (X;Y )and retrain the substitute
modelF0iteratively. This procedure helps to increase
the diversity of the replica training set and improve the
accuracy of substitute model F0.
4. Attack the Substitute Model
Utilize the previously introduced attack methods, such
as FGSM, to attack the model F0. The generated ad-
versarial examples are also very likely to mislead the
target model F, by the property of “transferability”.
What kind of attack algorithm should we choose to attack
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
substitute model? The success of the substitute model black-
box attack is based on the “transferability” property of adver-
sarial examples. Thus, during black-box attack, we choose
attacks that have high transferability, like FGSM, PGD and
momentum-based iterative attacks (Dong et al., 2018).
3.3.2. ZOO: Z EROTH ORDER OPTIMIZATION BASED
BLACK -BOXATTACK
Different from the work in section 3.3.1 where an adversary
can only obtain the label information from the classiﬁer,
it assumes that the attacker has access to the prediction
conﬁdence (score) from the victim classiﬁer’s output(Chen
et al., 2017). In this case, there is no need to build the
substitute training set and substitute model. Chen et al. give
an algorithm to “scrape” the gradient information around
victim sample xby observing the changes in the prediction
conﬁdenceF(x)as the pixel values of xare tuned.
The equation 4 shows for each index iof samplex, we add
(or subtract) xibyh. Ifhis small enough, we can scrape
the gradient information from the output of F()by:
@F(x)
@xiF(x+hei) F(x hei)
2h(4)
Utilizing the approximate gradient, we can apply the attack
formulations introduced in Section 3.1.3 and Section 3.1.7.
The success rate of ZOO is higher than substitute model
(Section 3.3.1) because it can utilize the information of
prediction conﬁdence, instead of solely the predicted labels.
3.3.3. Q UERY -EFFICIENT BLACK -BOXATTACK
Previously introduced black-box attacks require lots of in-
put queries to the classiﬁer, which may be prohibitive in
practical applications. There are some studies on improving
the efﬁciency of generating black-box adversarial examples
via a limited number of queries. For example, a more efﬁ-
cient way is introduced to estimate the gradient information
from model outputs (Ilyas et al., 2018). It uses Natural
Evolutional Strategies (Wierstra et al., 2014) to sample the
model’s output based on the queries around x, and estimate
the expectation of gradient of Fonx. This procedure re-
quires fewer queries to the model. Moreover, a genetic
algorithm is applied to search the neighbors of a benign
image for adversarial examples (Alzantot et al., 2018).
3.4. Semi-white (Grey) box Attack
In (Xiao et al., 2018a), a semi-white box attack framework is
introduced. It ﬁrst trained a Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014a), targeting the model of
interest. The attacker can then craft adversarial examples
directly from the generative network. The advantage of
the GAN-based attack is that it accelerates the process of
producing adversarial examples, and makes more naturaland more undetectable samples. Later, in (Deb et al., 2019),
GAN is used to generate adversarial faces to evade the face
recognition software. Their crafted face images appear to
be more natural and have barely distinguishable difference
from target face images.
3.5. Poisoning attacks
The attacks we have discussed so far are evasion attacks,
which are launched after the classiﬁcation model is trained.
Some works instead craft adversarial examples before train-
ing. These adversarial examples are inserted into the train-
ing set in order to undermine the overall accuracy of the
learned classiﬁer, or inﬂuence its prediction on certain test
examples. This process is called a poisoning attack.
Usually, the adversary in a poisoning attack setting has
knowledge about the architecture of the model which is
later trained on the poisoned dataset. Poisoning attacks
frequently applied to attack graph neural network, because
of the GNN’s speciﬁc transductive learning procedure. Here,
we introduce studies that craft image poisoning attacks.
3.5.1. B IGGIO ’SPOISONING ATTACK ON SVM
The work of (Biggio et al., 2012) introduced a method to
poison the training set in order to reduce SVM model’s
accuracy. In their setting, they try to ﬁgure out a poison
samplexcwhich, when inserted into the training set, will
result in the learned SVM model Fxchaving a large total
loss on the whole validation set. They achieve this by using
incremental learning techniques for SVMs (Cauwenberghs
& Poggio, 2001), which can model the inﬂuence of training
samples on the learned SVM model.
A poisoning attack based on procedure above is quite suc-
cessful for SVM models. However, for deep learning mod-
els, it is not easy to explicitly ﬁgure out the inﬂuence of
training samples on the trained model. Below we introduce
some approaches for applying poisoning attacks on DNN
models.
3.5.2. K OH’SMODEL EXPLANATION
In (Koh & Liang, 2017), a method is introduced to interpret
deep neural networks: how would the model’s predictions
change if a training sample were modiﬁed? Their model
can explicitly quantify the change in the ﬁnal loss with-
out retraining the model when only one training sample is
modiﬁed. This work can be naturally adopted to poisoning
attacks by ﬁnding those training samples that have large
inﬂuence on model’s prediction.
3.5.3. P OISON FROGS
In (Shafahi et al., 2018a), a method is introduced to insert
an adversarial image with true label to the training set, in
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
order to cause the trained model to wrongly classify a target
test sample. In this work, given a target test sample xtwith
the true label yt, the attacker ﬁrst uses a base sample xb
from classyb. Then, it solves the objective to ﬁnd x0:
x0= arg min
xjjZ(x) Z(xt)jj2
2+jjx xbjj2
2:
After inserting the poison sample x0into the training set,
the new model trained on Xtrain +fxg0will classify x0as
classyb, because of the small distance between x0andxb.
Using a new trained model to predict xt, the objective of
x0forces the score vector of xtandx0to be close. Thus, x0
andxtwill have the same prediction outcome. In this way,
the new trained model will predict the target sample xtas
classyb.
4. Countermeasures Against Adversarial
Examples
In order to protect the security of deep learning models, dif-
ferent strategies have been considered as countermeasures
against adversarial examples. There are basically three main
categories of these countermeasures:
1. Gradient Masking/Obfuscation
Since most attack algorithms are based on the gradient
information of the classiﬁer, masking or hiding the
gradients will confound the adversaries.
2. Robust Optimization
Re-learning a DNN classiﬁer’s parameters can increase
its robustness. The trained classiﬁer will correctly clas-
sify the subsequently generated adversarial examples.
3. Adversarial Examples Detection
It studies the distribution of natural/benign examples,
detects adversarial examples and disallows their input
into the classiﬁer
4.1. Gradient Masking/Obfuscation
Gradient masking/obfuscation refers to the strategy where a
defender deliberately hides the gradient information of the
model, in order to confuse the adversaries, since most attack
algorithms are based on the classiﬁer’s gradient information.
4.1.1. D EFENSIVE DISTILLATION
“Distillation”, ﬁrst introduced by (Hinton et al., 2015), is a
training technique to reduce the size of DNN architectures.
It fulﬁlls its goal by training a smaller-size DNN model on
the logits (outputs of the last layer before softmax).
In (Papernot et al., 2016b), it reformulates the procedure of
distillation to train a DNN model that can resist adversarial
examples, such as FGSM, Szegedy’s L-BFGS Attack or
DeepFool. It designs the training process as:(1)Train a network Fon the given training set (X;Y )by
setting the temperature1of the softmax to T.
(2)Compute the scores (after softmax) given by F(X)
again and evaluate the scores at temperature T.
(3)Train another network F0
Tusing softmax at tempera-
tureTon the dataset with soft labels (X;F (X)). We
refer the model F0
Tas the distilled model .
(4)Use the distilled network F0
Twith softmax at temper-
ature 1, which is denoted as F0
1during prediction on
test dataXtest(or adversarial examples),
In Carlini & Wagner (2017b), it explains why this algorithm
works: When we train a distilled network F0
Tat temperature
T and test it at temperature 1, we effectively cause the inputs
to the softmax to become larger by a factor of T. Let us
sayT= 100 , the logitsZ()for samplexand its neighbor
pointsx0will be 100 times larger. It will lead to the softmax
functionF1() =softmax (Z();1)outputting a score vector
like(;;:::; 1 (m 1);;:::; ), where the target output
class has a score extremely close to 1, and all other classes
have scores close to 0. In practice, the value of is so small
that its 32-bit ﬂoating-point value for computer is rounded
to 0. In this way, the computer cannot ﬁnd the gradient of
score function F0
1, which inhibits the gradient-based attacks.
4.1.2. S HATTERED GRADIENTS
Some studies(Buckman et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2017) try to
protect the model by preprocessing the input data. They add
a non-smooth or non-differentiable preprocessor g()and
then train a DNN model fong(X). The trained classiﬁer
f(g())is not differentiable in term of x, causing the failure
of adversarial attacks.
For example, Thermometer Encoding (Buckman et al., 2018)
uses a preprocessor to discretize an image’s pixel value xi
into al-dimensional vector (xi). (e.g. when l= 10 ,
(0:66) = 1111110000 ). The vector (xi)acts as a “ther-
mometer” to record the pixel xi’s value. A DNN model is
later trained on these vectors. The work in (Guo et al., 2017)
studies a number of image processing tools, such as image
cropping, compressing or total-variance minimization, to de-
termine whether these techniques help to protect the model
against adversarial examples. All these approaches block
up the smooth connection between the model’s output and
the original input samples, so the attacker cannot easily ﬁnd
the gradient@F(x)
@xfor attacking.
1Note that the softmax function at a temperature Tmeans:
softmax (x;T)i=exi=T
P
jexj=T, wherei= 0;2;:::;K 1
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
4.1.3. S TOCHASTIC /RANDOMIZED GRADIENTS
Some defense strategies try to randomize the DNN model in
order to confound the adversary. For instance, we train a set
of classiﬁers s=fFt:t= 1;2;:::;kg. During evaluation
on datax, we randomly select one classiﬁer from the set s
and predict the label y. Because the adversary has no idea
which classiﬁer is used by the prediction model, the attack
success rate will be reduced.
Some examples of this strategy include the work in (Dhillon
et al., 2018) that randomly drops some neurons of each layer
of the DNN model, and the work in (Xie et al., 2017a) that
resizes the input images to a random size and pads zeros
around the input image.
4.1.4. E XPLODING & V ANISHING GRADIENTS
Both PixelDefend (Song et al., 2017) and Defense-GAN
(Samangouei et al., 2018) suggest using generative mod-
els to project a potential adversarial example onto the be-
nign data manifold before classifying them. While PixelDe-
fend uses PixelCNN generative model (Van den Oord et al.,
2016), Defense-GAN utilizes a GAN architecture (Goodfel-
low et al., 2014a). The generative models can be viewed as
a puriﬁer that transforms adversarial examples into benign
examples.
Both of these methods add a generative network before
the classiﬁer DNN, which will cause the ﬁnal classiﬁcation
model to be an extremely deep neural network. The un-
derlying reason that these defenses succeed is because: the
cumulative product of partial derivatives from each layer
will cause the gradient@L(x)
@xto be extremely small or irregu-
larly large, which prevents the attacker accurately estimating
the location of adversarial examples.
4.1.5. G RADIENT MASKING /OBFUSCATION METHODS
ARE NOT SAFE
The work in (Carlini & Wagner, 2017b) shows that the
method of “Defensive Distillation” (section 4.1.1) is still
vulnerable to their adversarial examples. The work in (Atha-
lye et al., 2018) devises different attacking algorithms to
break gradient masking/obfuscation defending strategies
(Section (4.1.2), Section (4.1.3), Section (4.1.4)). The main
weakness of the gradient masking strategy is that: it can
only “confound” the adversaries, but it cannot eliminate the
existence of adversarial examples.
4.2. Robust Optimization
Robust optimization methods aim to improve the classiﬁer’s
robustness (Section (2.2)) by changing DNN model’s man-
ner of learning. They study how to learn model parameters
that can give promising predictions on potential adversar-ial examples. In this ﬁeld, the works majorly focus on:
(1) learning model parameters to minimize the average
adversarial loss: (Section 2.2.2)
= arg min
2E
xDmax
jjx0 xjjL(;x0;y) (5)
or (2) learning model parameters to maximize the average
minimal perturbation distance : (Section 2.2.1)
= arg max
2E
xDmin
C(x0)6=yjjx0 xjj: (6)
Typically, a robust optimization algorithm should have a
prior knowledge of its potential threat or potential attack
(adversarial spaceD). Then, the defenders build classiﬁers
which are safe against this speciﬁc attack. For most of
the related works (Goodfellow et al., 2014b; Kurakin et al.,
2016b; Madry et al., 2017), they aim to defend against ad-
versarial examples generated from small lp(speciﬁcally l1
andl2) norm perturbation. Even though there is a chance
that these defenses are still vulnerable to attacks from other
mechanisms, (e.g. (Xiao et al., 2018b)), studying the secu-
rity againstlpattack is fundamental and can be generalized
to other attacks.
In this section, we concentrate on defense approaches using
robustness optimization against lpattacks. We categorize
the related works into three groups: (a) regularization meth-
ods, (b) adversarial (re)training and (c) certiﬁed defenses.
4.2.1. R EGULARIZATION METHODS
Some early studies on defending against adversarial exam-
ples focus on exploiting certain properties that a robust DNN
should have in order to resist adversarial examples. For ex-
ample, in (Szegedy et al., 2013), it suggests that a robust
model should be stable when its inputs are distorted, so they
turn to constrain the Lipschitz constant to impose this “sta-
bility” of model output. Training on these regularizations
can sometimes heuristically help the model be more robust.
1. Penalize Layers’ Lipschitz Constant
When ﬁrst claimed the vulnerability of DNN models
to adversarial examples, authors in (Szegedy et al.,
2013) suggested that adding regularization terms on the
parameters during training can force the trained model
to be stable. It suggested constraining the Lipschitz
constantLkbetween any two layers:
8x;;jjhk(x;Wk) hk(x+;Wk)jjLkjjjj;
so that the outcome of each layer will not be easily
inﬂuenced by the small distortion of its input. The work
(Cisse et al., 2017) formalized this idea, by claiming
that the model’s adversarial risk (5) is right dependent
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
on this instability Lk:
E
xDLadv(x)E
xDL(x)
+E
xD[ max
jjx0 xjjjL(F(x0);y) L(F(x);y)j]
E
xDL(x) +pKY
k=1Lk
wherepis the Lipschitz constant of the loss function.
This formula states that during the training process,
penalizing the large instability for each hidden layer
can help to decrease the adversarial risk of the model,
and consequently increase the robustness of model.
The idea of constraining instability also appears in the
work (Miyato et al., 2015) for semi-supervised, and
unsupervised defenses.
2. Penalize Layers’ Partial Derivative
The work in (Gu & Rigazio, 2014) introduced a Deep
Contractive Network algorithm to regularize the train-
ing. It was inspired by the Contractive Autoencoder
(Rifai et al., 2011), which was introduced to denoise
the encoded representation learning. The Deep Con-
tractive Network suggests adding a penalty on the par-
tial derivatives at each layer into the standard back-
propagation framework, so that the change of the input
data will not cause large change on the output of each
layer. Thus, it becomes difﬁcult for the classiﬁer to
give different predictions on perturbed data samples.
4.2.2. A DVERSARIAL (RE)TRAINING
(i) Adversarial Training with FGSM
The work in (Goodfellow et al., 2014b) is the ﬁrst to
suggest feeding generated adversarial examples into
the training process. By adding the adversarial exam-
ples with true label (x0;y)into the training set, the
training set will tell the classiﬁer that x0belongs to
classy, so that the trained model will correctly predict
the label of future adversarial examples.
In the work (Goodfellow et al., 2014b), they use non-
targeted FGSM (Section (3.1.3)) to generate adversar-
ial examples x0for the training dataset:
x0=x+sign(rxL(;x;y ));
By training on benign samples augmented with adver-
sarial examples, they increase the robustness against
adversarial examples generated by FGSM.
The training strategy of this method is changed in (Ku-
rakin et al., 2016b) so that the model can be scaled
to larger dataset such as ImageNet. They suggest that
using batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)Algorithm 1 Adversarial Training with FGSM by batches
Randomly initialize network F
repeat
1. Read minibatch B=fx1;:::;xmgfrom training set
2. Generatekadversarial examples fx1
adv;:::xk
advgfor
corresponding benign examples using current state of
the network F.
3. UpdateB0=fx1
adv;:::;xk
adv;xk+1;:::;xmg
Do one training step of network Fusing minibatch B0
until training converged
should improve the efﬁciency of adversarial training.
We give a short sketch of their algorithm in Algorithm
(1).
The trained classiﬁer has good robustness on FGSM
attacks, but it is still vulnerable to iterative attacks.
Later, the work in (Tram `er et al., 2017) argues that
this defense is also vulnerable to single-step attacks.
Adversarial training with FGSM will cause gradient
obfuscation (Section (4.1)), where there is an extreme
non-smoothness of the trained classiﬁer Fnear the test
samplex.
(ii) Adversarial Training with PGD
The work in (Madry et al., 2017) suggests using Pro-
jected Gradient Descent attack (Section (3.1.6)) for
adversarial training, instead of using single-step at-
tacks like FGSM. The PGD attacks (Section (3.1.6))
can be seen as a heuristic method to ﬁnd the “most
adversarial” example in the l1ball around x: B(x):
xadv= arg max
x02B(x)L(x0;F) (7)
Here, the most-adversarial example xadvis the loca-
tion where the classiﬁer Fis most likely to be mis-
Loss function around 𝑥Zoom the Loss function around 𝑥
Figure 7. Illustration of gradient masking for adversarial training
via FGSM. It plots the loss function of the trained classiﬁer around
xon the grids of gradient direction and another randomly chosen
direction. We can see that the gradient poorly approximates the
global loss. (Image Credit: (Tram `er et al., 2017))
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
led. When training the DNN model on these most-
adversarial examples, it actually solves the problem
of learning model parameters that minimize the ad-
versarial loss (5). If the trained model has small loss
value on these most-adversarial examples, the model
is safe at everywhere in x’s neighbor ball B(x). One
thing to note is: this method trains the model only on
adversarial examples, instead of a mix of benign and
adversarial examples. The training algorithm is shown
in Algorithm (2).
The trained model under this method demonstrates
good robustness against both single-step and iterative
attacks on MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. However,
this method involves an iterative attack for all the train-
ing samples. Thus, the time complexity of this adver-
sarial training will be k(usingk-step PGD) times as
large as that for natural training, and as a consequence,
it is hard to scale to large datasets such as ImageNet.
(iii) Ensemble Adversarial Training
The work in (Tram `er et al., 2017) introduced an adver-
sarial training method which can protect CNN models
against single-step attacks and can be also applied to
large datasets such as ImageNet.
The main approach is to augment the classiﬁer’s train-
ing set with adversarial examples crafted from other
pre-trained classiﬁers. For example, if we aim to train a
robust classiﬁer F, we can ﬁrst pre-train classiﬁers F1,
F2, andF3as references. These models have different
hyperparameters with model F. Then, for each sample
x, we use a single-step attack FGSM to craft adversar-
ial examples on F1,F2andF3to getx1
adv,x2
adv,x3
adv.
Because of the transferability property (section 5.3) of
the single-step attacks across different models, x1
adv,
x2
adv,x3
advare also likely to mislead the classiﬁer F. It
means that these samples are a good approximation for
the “most adversarial” example (7) for model Fonx.
Training on these samples together will approximately
minimize the adversarial loss in (5).
This ensemble adversarial training algorithm is more
efﬁcient than these in Section (i) and Section (ii), since
it decouples the process of model training and gener-
Algorithm 2 Adversarial Training with PGD
Randomly initialize network F
repeat
1. Read minibatch B=fx1;:::;xmgfrom training set
2. Generate madversarial examples fx1
adv;:::xm
advg
by PGD attack using current state of the network F.
3. UpdateB0=fx1
adv;:::;xm
advg
Do one training step of network Fusing minibatch B0
until training convergedAlgorithm 3 Free Adversarial Training
Randomly initialize network F
repeat
1. Read minibatch B=fx1;:::;xmgfrom training set
2. fori= 1:::m do
(a) Update model parameter 
g E(x;y)2B[rL(x+;y; )]
gadv rxL(x+;y; )
  g
(b) Generate adversarial examples
 +sign(gadv)
 clip(; ;)
3. Update minibatch Bwith adversarial examples x+
until training converged
ating adversarial examples. The experimental results
show that this method can provide robustness against
single-step and black-box attacks on the ImageNet
dataset.
(iv) Accelerate Adversarial Training
While it is one of the most promising and reliable de-
fense strategies, adversarial training with PGD attack
(Madry et al., 2017) is generally slow and computation-
ally costly.
The work in (Shafahi et al., 2019) proposes a free adver-
sarial training algorithm which improves the efﬁciency
by reusing the backward pass calculations. In this algo-
rithm, the gradient of the loss to input:@L(x+;)
@xand
the gradient of the loss to model parameters:@L(x+;)
@
can be computed together in one back propagation iter-
ation, by sharing the same components of chain rule.
Thus, the adversarial training process is highly acceler-
ated. The free adversarial training algorithm is shown
in Algorithm (3).
The work in (Zhang et al., 2019a) argues that when the
model parameters are ﬁxed, the PGD-generated adver-
sarial example is only coupled with the weights of the
ﬁrst layer of DNN. It is based on solving a Pontrya-
gin’s Maximal Principle (Pontryagin, 2018). There-
fore, the work in (Zhang et al., 2019a) develops an
algorithm You Only Propagate Once (YOPO) to reuse
the gradient of the loss to the model’s ﬁrst layer out-
put@L(x+;)
@Z1(x)during generating PGD attacks. In this
way, YOPO avoids a large amount of times to access
the gradient and therefore it reduces the computational
cost.
4.2.3. P ROVABLE DEFENSES
Adversarial training has been shown to be effective in pro-
tecting models against adversarial examples. However, this
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
is still no formal guarantee about the safety of the trained
classiﬁers. We will never know whether there are more ag-
gressive attacks that can break those defenses, so directly ap-
plying these adversarial training algorithms in safety-critical
tasks would be irresponsible.
As we mentioned in Section (3.1.8), the work (Carlini et al.,
2017) was the ﬁrst to introduce a Reluplex algorithm to
seriously verify the robustness of DNN models: when the
modelFis given, the algorithm ﬁgures out the exact value
of minimal perturbation distance r(x;F). This is to say, the
classiﬁer is safe against any perturbations with norm less
thanr(x;F). If we apply Reluplex on the whole test set,
we can tell what percentage of samples are absolutely safe
against perturbations less than norm r0. In this way, we
gain conﬁdence and reduce the expected risk when building
DNN models.
The method of Reluplex seeks to ﬁnd the exact value of
r(x;F)that can verify the model F’s robustness on x. Al-
ternately, works such as (Raghunathan et al., 2018a; Wong
& Kolter, 2017; Hein & Andriushchenko, 2017) try to
ﬁnd trainable “certiﬁcates” C(x;F)to verify the model
robustness. For example, in (Hein & Andriushchenko,
2017), a certiﬁcate C(x;F)is calculated for model Fonx,
which is a lower bound of minimal perturbation distance:
C(x;F)r(x;F). As shown in Figure (8), the model
must be safe against any perturbation with norm limited by
C(x;F). Moreover, these certiﬁcates are trainable. Training
to optimize these certiﬁcates will grant good robustness to
the classiﬁer. In this section, we’ll brieﬂy introduce some
methods to design these certiﬁcates.
(i) Lower Bound of Minimal Perturbation
The work in (Hein & Andriushchenko, 2017) derives
a lower boundC(x;F)for the minimal perturbation
distance ofFonxbased on Cross-Lipschitz Theorem :
max
>0minfmin
i6=yZy(x) Zi(x)
maxx02B(x)jjrZy(x0) rZi(x0)jj; g
The detailed derivation can be found in (Hein & An-
driushchenko, 2017). Note that the formulation of
C(x;F)only depends on Fandx, and it is easy to
calculate for a neural network with one hidden layer.
The modelFthus can be proved to be safe in the re-
gion within distance C(x;F). Training to maximize
this lower bound will make the classiﬁer more robust.
(ii) Upper Bound of Adversarial Loss
The works in (Raghunathan et al., 2018a; Wong &
Kolter, 2017) aim to solve the same problem. They try
to ﬁnd an upper bound U(x;F)which is larger than
adversarial lossLadv(x;F):
Ladv(x) = max
x0fmax
i6=yZi(x0) Zy(x0)g
subject tox02B(x)(8)
𝑟(𝑥,𝐹)𝐶(𝑥,𝐹)Figure 8. The derived certiﬁcate C(x;F)is a lower bound of mini-
mal perturbation distance (x;F). The model is safe in C(x;F)
ball.
Recall that in Section (2.2.2), we introduced the func-
tionmaxi6=yZi(x0) Zy(x0)as a type of loss function
called margin loss .
The certiﬁcateU(x;F)acts in this way: if U(x;F)<
0, then adversarial loss L(x;F)<0. Thus, the classi-
ﬁer always gives the largest score to the true label yin
the regionB(x), and the model is safe in this region.
To increase the model’s robustness, we should learn
parameters that have the smallest Uvalue, so that more
and more data samples will have negative Uvalues.
The work (Raghunathan et al., 2018a) uses integra-
tion inequalities to derive the certiﬁcate and use semi-
deﬁnite programming (SDP) (Vandenberghe & Boyd,
1996) to solve the certiﬁcate. In contrast, the work
(Wong & Kolter, 2017) transforms the problem (8) into
a linear programming problem and solves the prob-
lem via training an alternative neural network. Both
methods only consider neural networks with one hid-
den layer. There are also studies (Raghunathan et al.,
2018b; Wong et al., 2018) that improved the efﬁciency
and scalability of these algorithms.
Furthermore, the work in (Sinha et al., 2017) com-
bines adversarial training and provable defense to-
gether. They train the classiﬁer by feeding adversarial
examples which are sampled from the distribution of
worst-case perturbation, and derive the certiﬁcates by
studying the Lagrangian duality of adversarial loss.
4.3. Adversarial Example Detection
Adversarial example detection is another main approach to
protect DNN classiﬁers. Instead of predicting the model’s
input directly, these methods ﬁrst distinguish whether the
input is benign or adversarial. Then, if it can detect that
the input is adversarial, the DNN classiﬁer will refuse to
predict its label. In (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a), it sorts the
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
threat models into 3 categories that the detection techniques
should deal with:
1.A Zero-Knowledge Adversary only has access to the
classiﬁerF’s parameters, and has no knowledge of the
detection model D.
2.A Perfect-Knowledge Adversary is aware of the model
F, and the detection scheme Dand its parameters.
3.A Limited-Knowledge Adversary is aware of the model
Fand the detection scheme D, but it does not have
access toD’s parameters. That is, this adversary does
not know the model’s training set.
In all these threat settings, the detection tools are required
to correctly classify the adversarial examples, and have low
possibility of misclassifying benign examples. Next, we
will go through some main methods for adversarial example
detection.
4.3.1. A NAUXILIARY MODEL TO CLASSIFY
ADVERSARIAL EXAMPLES
Some works focus on designin auxiliary models that aim
to distinguish adversarial examples from benign examples.
The work in (Grosse et al., 2017) trains a DNN model with
jYj=K+1labels, with an additional label for all adversar-
ial examples, so that network will assign adversarial exam-
ples into the K+ 1class. Similarly, the work (Gong et al.,
2017) trains a binary classiﬁcation model to discriminate all
adversarial examples apart from benign samples, and then
trains a classiﬁer on recognized benign samples. The work
in (Metzen et al., 2017a) proposes a detection method to
construct an auxiliary neural network Dwhich takes inputs
from the values of hidden nodes Hof the natural trained
classiﬁer. The trained detection classiﬁer D:H! [0;1]is
a binary classiﬁcation model that distinguishes adversarial
examples from benign ones by the hidden layers.
4.3.2. U SING STATISTICS TO DISTINGUISH
ADVERSARIAL EXAMPLES
Some early works heuristically study the differences in the
statistical properties of adversarial examples and benign
examples. For example, in (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016),
adversarial examples are found to place a higher weight on
the larger (later) principle components where the natural
images have larger weight on early principle components.
Thus, they can split them by PCA.
In (Grosse et al., 2017), it uses a statistical test: Maximum
Mean Discrepancy (MMD) test (Gretton et al., 2012), which
is used to test whether two datasets are drawn from the same
distribution. They use this testing tool to test whether a
group of data points are benign or adversarial.4.3.3. C HECKING THE PREDICTION CONSISTENCY
Other studies focus on checking the consistency of the sam-
plex’s prediction outcome. They usually manipulate the
model parameters or the input examples themselves, to
check whether the outputs of the classiﬁer have signiﬁcant
changes. These are based on the belief that the classiﬁer
will have stable predictions on natural examples under these
manipulations.
The work in (Feinman et al., 2017) randomizes the classiﬁer
using Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014). If these classiﬁers
give very different prediction outcomes on xafter random-
ization, this sample xis very likely to be an adversarial
one.
The work in (Xu et al., 2017) manipulates the input sam-
ple itself to check the consistency. For each input sample
x, it reduces the color depth of the image (e.g. one 8-bit
grayscale image with 256 possible values for each pixel be-
comes a 7-bit with 128 possible values), as shown in Figure
9. It hypothesizes that for natural images, reducing the color
Figure 9. Images from MNIST and CIFAR10. From left to right,
the color depth is reduced from 8-bit, 7-bit,...,2-bit,1-bit. (Image
Credit: (Xu et al., 2017))
depth will not change the prediction result, but the predic-
tion on adversarial examples will change. In this way, they
can detect adversarial examples. Similar to reducing the
color depth, the work (Feinman et al., 2017) also introduced
other feature squeezing methods such as spatial smoothing.
4.3.4. S OME ATTACKS WHICH EVADE ADVERSARIAL
DETECTION
The work in (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a) bypassed 10 of the
detection methods which fall into the three categories above.
The feature squeezing methods were broken by (Sharma
& Chen, 2018), which introduced a “stronger” adversarial
attack.
The authors in (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a) claim that the
properties which are intrinsic to adversarial examples are
not very easy to ﬁnd. They also gave several suggestions on
future detection works:
1.Randomization can increase the required attacking distortion.
2.Defenses that directly manipulate on raw pixel values are
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
ineffective.
3.Evaluation should be down on multiple datasets besides
MNIST.
4. Report false positive and true positive rates for detection.
5.Use a strong attack and simply focusing on white-box attacks
is risky.
5. Explanations for the Existence of
Adversarial Examples
In addition to crafting adversarial examples and defending
them, explaining the reason behind these phenomena is also
important. In this section, we brieﬂy introduce the recent
works and hypotheses on the key questions of adversarial
learning. We hope our introduction will give our audience
a basic view on the existing ideas and solutions for these
questions.
5.1. Why Do Adversarial Examples Exist?
Some original works such as (Szegedy et al., 2013), state
that the existence of adversarial examples is due to the fact
that DNN models do not generalize well in low probability
space of data. The generalization issue may be caused by
the high complexity of DNN model structures.
However, even linear models are also vulnerable to adver-
sarial attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2014b). Furthermore, in
the work (Madry et al., 2017), they implement experiments
to show that an increase in model capacity will improve the
model robustness.
Some insight can be gained about the existence of adver-
sarial examples by studying the model’s decision boundary.
The adversarial examples are almost always close to de-
cision boundary of a natural trained model, which may be
because the decision boundary is too ﬂat (Fawzi et al., 2016),
too curved (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017b), or inﬂexible
(Fawzi et al., 2018).
Studying the reason behind the existence of adversarial
examples is important because it can guide us in designing
more robust models, and help us to understand existing deep
learning models. However, there is still no consensus on
this problem.
5.2. Can We Build an Optimal Classiﬁer?
Many recent works hypothesize that it might be impossible
to build optimally robust classiﬁer. For example, the work
in (Shafahi et al., 2018b) claims that adversarial examples
are inevitable because the distribution of data in each class
is not well-concentrated, which leaves room for adversarial
examples. In this vein, the work (Schmidt et al., 2018)
claims that to improve the robustness of a trained model,
it is necessary to collect more data. Moreover, the workin (Tsipras et al., 2018) suggests that even if we can build
models with high robustness, it must take cost of some
accuracy.
5.3. What is Transferability?
Transferability is one of the key properties of adversarial
examples. It means that the adversarial examples generated
to target one victim model also have a high probability of
misleading other models.
Some works compare the transferability between different
attacking algorithms. In (Kurakin et al., 2016a), they claim
that in ImageNet, single step attacks (FGSM) are more likely
to transfer between models than iterative attacks (BIM) un-
der same perturbation intensity.
The property of transferability is frequently utilized in at-
tacking techniques in black-box setting (Papernot et al.,
2017). If the model parameters are veiled to attackers, they
can turn to attack other substitute models and enjoy the
transferability of their generated samples. The property of
transferability is also utilized by defending methods as in
(Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016): since the adversarial exam-
ples for model Aare also likely to be adversarial for model
B, adversarial training using adversarial examples from B
will help defend A.
6. Graph Adversarial Examples
Adversarial examples also exist in graph-structured data
(Z¨ugner et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2018). Attackers usually
slightly modify the graph structure and node features, in
an effort to cause the graph neural networks (GNNs) to
give wrong prediction for node classiﬁcation or graph clas-
siﬁcation tasks. These adversarial attacks therefore raise
concerns on the security of applying GNN models. For
example, a bank needs to build a reliable credit evaluation
system where their model should not be easily attacked by
malicious manipulations.
There are some distinct differences between attacking graph
models and attacking traditional image classiﬁers:
Non-Independence Samples of the graph-structured
data are not independent: changing one’s feature or
connection will inﬂuence the prediction on others.
Poisoning Attacks Graph neural networks are usually
performed in a transductive learning setting for node
classiﬁcation: the test data are also used to trained the
classiﬁer. This means that we modify the test data, the
trained classiﬁer is also changed.
Discreteness When modifying the graph structure, the
search space for adversarial example is discrete. Previ-
ous gradient methods to ﬁnd adversarial examples may
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
be invalid in this case.
Below are the methods used by some successful works to
attack and defend graph neural networks.
6.1. Deﬁnitions for Graphs and Graph Models
In this section, the notations and deﬁnitions of the graph
structured data and graph neural network models are deﬁned
below. A graph can be represented as G=fV;Eg, where
Vis a set ofNnodes andEis a set ofMedges. The edges
describe the connections between the nodes, which can
also be expressed by an adjacency matrix A2f0;1gNN.
Furthermore, a graph Gis called an attributed graph if each
node inVis associated with a d-dimensional attribute vector
xv2Rd. The attributes for all the nodes in the graph can
be summarized as a matrix X2RNd, thei-th row of
which represents the attribute vector for node vi.
The goal of node classiﬁcation is to learn a function g:
V!Y that maps each node to one class in Y, based on a
group of labeled nodes in G. One of the most successful
node classiﬁcation models is Graph Convolutional Network
(GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016). The GCN model keeps
aggregating the information from neighboring nodes to learn
representations for each node v,
H(0)=X;H(l+1)=(^AH(l)Wl):
whereis a non-linear activation function, the matrix ^A
is deﬁned as ^A=~D 1
2~A~D 1
2,~A=A+IN, and ~Dii=P
j~Aij. The last layer outputs the score vectors of each
node for prediction: H(m)
v=F(v;X).
6.2. Zugner’s Greedy Method
In the work of (Z ¨ugner et al., 2018), they consider attacking
node classiﬁcation models, Graph Convolutional Networks
(Kipf & Welling, 2016), by modifying the nodes connec-
tions or node features (binary). In this setting, an adversary
is allowed to add/remove edges between nodes, or ﬂip the
feature of nodes with limited number of operations. The
goal is to mislead the GCN model which is trained on the
perturbed graph (transductive learning) to give wrong pre-
dictions. In their work, they also specify three levels of
adversary capabilities: they can manipulate (1) all nodes,
(2) a set of nodesAincluding the target victim x, and (3) a
set of nodesAwhich does not include the target node x. A
sketch is shown in Figure 10.
Similar to the objective function in (Carlini & Wagner,
2017b) for image data, they formulate the graph attack-
ing problem as a search for a perturbed graph G0such that
the learned GCN classiﬁer Zhas the largest score margin:
max
i6=yln(Z
y(v0;G0)) ln(Z
i(v0;G0)) (9)
Figure 10. Adding an edge to alter the prediction of Graph Convo-
lutional Network. (Image Credit: (Z ¨ugner et al., 2018))
The authors solve this objective by ﬁnding perturbations on
a ﬁxed, linearized substitute GCN classiﬁer Gsubwhich is
trained on the clean graph. They use a heuristic algorithm
to ﬁnd the most inﬂuential operations on graph Gsub(e.g.
removing/adding the edge or ﬂipping the feature which
can cause largest increase in (9)). The experimental results
demonstrate that the adversarial operations are also effective
on the later trained classiﬁer Z.
During the attacking process, the authors also impose two
key constraints to ensure the similarity of the perturbed
graph to the original one: (1) the degree distribution should
be maintained, and (2) two positive features which never
happen together in Gshould also not happen together in G0.
Later, some other graph attacking works (e.g. (Ma et al.,
2019)) suggest the eigenvalues/eigenvectors of the graph
Laplacian Matrix should also be maintained during attack-
ing, otherwise the attacks are easily detected. However,
there is still no ﬁrm consensus on how to formally deﬁne
the similarity between graphs and generate unnoticeable
perturbation.
6.3. Dai’s RL Method : RL-S2V
Different from Zugner’s greedy method, the work (Dai et al.,
2018) introduced a Reinforcement Learning method to at-
tack the graph neural networks. This work only considers
adding or removing edges to modify the graph structure.
In (Dai et al., 2018)’s setting, a node classiﬁer Ftrained
on the clean graph G(0)=Gis given, node classiﬁer F
is unknown to the attacker, and the attacker is allowed to
modifymedges in total to alter F’s prediction on the victim
nodev0. The authors formulate this attacking mission as
a Q-Learning game (Mnih et al., 2013), with the deﬁned
Markov Decision Process as below:
State The statestis represented by the tuple (G(t);v0),
whereG(t)is the modiﬁed graph with titerative steps.
Action To represent the action to add/remove edges, a
single action at time step tisat2VV , which means
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
the edge to be added or removed.
Reward In order to encourage actions to fool the clas-
siﬁer, we should give a positive reward if v0’s label is
altered. Thus, the authors deﬁne the reward function
as :r(st;at) = 0;8t= 1;2;:::;m 1, and for the last
step:
r(sm;am) =(
1 ifC(v0;G(m))6=y
 1ifC(v0;G(m)) =y
Termination The process stops once the agent ﬁnishes
modifyingmedges.
The Q-Learning algorithm helps the adversary have knowl-
edge about which actions to take (add/remove which edge)
on the given state (current graph structure), in order to get
largest reward (change F’s output).
6.4. Graph Structure Poisoning via Meta-Learning
Previous graph attack works only focus on attacking one sin-
gle victim node. The work in (Z ¨ugner & G ¨unnemann, 2019)
attempts to poison the graph so that the global node classiﬁ-
cation performance of GCN can be undermined and made
almost useless. The approach is based on meta learning
(Finn et al., 2017), which is traditionally used for hyperpa-
rameter optimization, few-shot image recognition, and fast
reinforcement learning. In the work (Z ¨ugner & G ¨unnemann,
2019), they use meta learning technique which takes the
graph structure as the hyperparameter of the GCN model to
optimize. Using their algorithm to perturb 5%edges of a
CITESEER graph dataset, they can increase the misclassiﬁ-
cation rate to over 30%.
6.5. Attack on Node Embedding
The work in (Bojcheski & G ¨unnemann, 2018) studies how
to perturb the graph structure in order to corrupt the quality
of node embedding, and consequently hinder subsequent
learning tasks such as node classiﬁcation or link prediction.
Speciﬁcally, they study DeepWalk (Perozzi et al., 2014) as
a random-walk based node embedding learning approach
and approximately ﬁnd the graph which has the largest loss
of the learned node embedding.
6.6. ReWatt: Attacking Graph Classiﬁer via Rewiring
The ReWatt method (Ma et al., 2019) attempts to attack the
graph classiﬁcation models, where each input of the model
is a whole graph. The proposed algorithm can mislead the
model by making unnoticeable perturbations on graph.
In their attacking scheme, they utilize reinforcement learn-
ing to ﬁnd a rewiring operation a= (v1;v2;v3)at each
step, which is a set of 3 nodes. The ﬁrst two nodes wereconnected in the original graph and the edge between them
is removed in the ﬁrst step of the rewiring process. The sec-
ond step of the rewiring process adds an edge between the
nodev1andv3, wherev3is constrained to be within 2-hops
away fromv1. Some analysis in (Ma et al., 2019) shows
that the rewiring operation tends to keep the eigenvalues
of the graph’s Laplacian matrix, which makes it difﬁcult to
detect the attacker.
6.7. Defending Graph Neural Networks
Many works have shown that graph neural networks are
vulnerable to adversarial examples, even though there is still
no consensus on how to deﬁne the unnoticeable perturbation.
Some defending works have already appeared. Many of
them are inspired by the popular defense methodology in
image classiﬁcation, using adversarial training to protect
GNN models, (Feng et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019), which
provides moderate robustness.
7. Adversarial Examples in Audio and Text
Data
Adversarial examples also exist in DNNs’ applications in
audio and text domains. An adversary can craft fake speech
or fake sentences that mislead the machine language pro-
cessors. Meanwhile, deep learning models on audio/text
data have already been widely used in many tasks, such as
Apple Siri and Amazon Echo. Therefore, the studies on
adversarial examples in audio/text data domain also deserve
our attention.
As for text data, the discreteness nature of the inputs makes
the gradient-based attack on images not applicable anymore
and forces people to craft discrete perturbations on different
granularities of text (character-level, word-level, sentence-
level, etc.). In this section, we introduce the related works
in attacking NLP architectures for different tasks.
7.1. Speech Recognition Attacks
The work in (Carlini & Wagner, 2018) studies how to attack
state-of-art speech-to-text transcription networks, such as
DeepSpeech (Hannun et al., 2014). In their setting, when
given any speech waveform x, they can add an inaudible
sound perturbation that makes the synthesized speech x+
be recognized as any targeted desired phrase.
In their attacking work, they limited the maximum Decibels
(dB) on any time of the added perturbation noise, so that the
audio distortion is unnoticeable. Moreover, they inherit the
C & W’s attack method (Carlini & Wagner, 2017b) on their
audio attack setting.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
7.2. Text Classiﬁcation Attacks
Text classiﬁcation is one of main tasks in natural language
processing. In text classiﬁcation, the model is devised to
understand a sentence and correctly label the sentence. For
example, text classiﬁcation models can be applied on the
IMDB dataset for characterizing user’s opinion (positive
or negative) on the movies, based on the provided reviews.
Recent works of adversarial attacks have demonstrated that
text classiﬁers are easily misguided by slightly modifying
the texts’ spelling, words or structures.
7.2.1. A TTACKING WORD EMBEDDING
The work (Miyato et al., 2016) considers to add perturbation
on the word embedding (Mikolov et al., 2013), so as to
fool a LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) classiﬁer.
However, this attack only considers perturbing the word
embedding, instead of original input sentence.
7.2.2. A TTACKING WORDS AND LETTERS
The work HotFlip (Ebrahimi et al., 2017) considers to re-
place a letter in a sentence in order to mislead a character-
level text classiﬁer (each letter is encoded to a vector). For
example, as shown in Figure 11, changing a single letter in
a sentence alters the model’s prediction on its topic. The
attack algorithm manages to achieve this by ﬁnding the
most-inﬂuential letter replacement via gradient information.
These adversarial perturbations can be noticed by human
readers, but they don’t change the content of the text as a
whole, nor do they affect human judgments.
Figure 11. Replace one letter in a sentence to alter a text classiﬁer’s
prediction on a sentence’s topic. (Image Credit: (Ebrahimi et al.,
2017))
The work in (Liang et al., 2017) considers to manipulate
the victim sentence on word and phrase levels. They try
adding, removing or modifying the words and phrases in
the sentences. In their approach, the ﬁrst step is similar to
HotFlip (Ebrahimi et al., 2017). For each training sample,
they ﬁnd the most-inﬂuential letters, called “hot characters”.
Then, they label the words that have more than 3 “hot charac-
ters” as “hot words”. “Hot words” composite “hot phrases”,
which are most-inﬂuential phrases in the sentences. Ma-
nipulating these phrases is likely to inﬂuence the model’s
prediction, so these phrases composite a “vocabulary” toguide the attacking. When given a sentence, an adversary
can use this vocabulary to ﬁnd the weakness of the sentence,
add one hot phrase, remove a hot phrase in the given sen-
tence, or insert a meaningful fact which is composed of hot
phrases.
DeepWordBug (Gao et al., 2018) and TextBugger Li et al.
(2018a) are black-box attack methods for text classiﬁcation.
The basic idea of the former is to deﬁne a scoring strategy
to identify the key tokens which will lead to a wrong predic-
tion of the classiﬁer if modiﬁed. Then they try four types of
“imperceivable” modiﬁcations on such tokens: swap, substi-
tution, deletion and insertion, to mislead the classiﬁer. The
latter follows the same idea, and improves it by introducing
new scoring functions.
The works (Samanta & Mehta, 2017; Iyyer et al., 2018) start
to craft adversarial sentences that grammatically correct and
maintain the syntax structure of the original sentence. The
work in (Samanta & Mehta, 2017) achieves this by using
synonyms to replace original words, or adding some words
which have different meanings in different contexts. On the
other hand, the work (Iyyer et al., 2018) manages to fool the
text classiﬁer by paraphrasing the structure of sentences.
The work in (Lei et al., 2018) conducts sentence and word
paraphrasing on input texts to craft adversarial examples. In
this work, they ﬁrst build a paraphrasing corpus that contains
a lot of word and sentence paraphrases. To ﬁnd an optimal
paraphrase of an input text, a greedy method is adopted to
search valid paraphrases for each word or sentence from the
corpus. Moreover, they propose a gradient-guided method
to improve the efﬁciency of greedy search. This work also
has signiﬁcant contributions in theory: they formally deﬁne
the task of discrete adversarial attack as an optimization
problem on a set functions and they prove that the greedy
algorithm ensures a 1 1
eapproximation factor for CNN
and RNN text classiﬁers.
7.3. Adversarial Examples in Other NLP Tasks
7.3.1. A TTACK ON READING COMPREHENSION
SYSTEMS
The work (Jia & Liang, 2017) studies whether Reading Com-
prehension models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In
reading comprehension tasks, the machine learning model
is asked to answer a given question, based on the model’s
“understanding” from a paragraph of an article. For example,
the work (Jia & Liang, 2017) concentrates on Stanford Ques-
tion Answering Dataset (SQuAD) where systems answer
questions about paragraphs from Wikipedia.
The authors successfully degrade the intelligence of the
state-of-art reading comprehension models on SQuAD by
inserting adversarial sentences. As shown in Figure 12, the
inserted sentence (blue) looks similar to the question, but
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
it does not contradict the correct answer. This inserted sen-
tence is understandable for human readers but confuses the
machine a lot. As a result, the proposed attacking algorithm
reduced the performance of 16 state-of-art reading compre-
hension models from average 75% F1 score (accuracy) to
36%.
Figure 12. By adding an adversarial sentence which is similar to
the answer, the reading comprehension model gives a wrong an-
swer. (Image Credit: (Jia & Liang, 2017))
Their proposed algorithm AddSent shows a four-step opera-
tion to ﬁnd adversarial sentences.
1.Fake Question : What is the name of the quarterback
whose jersey number is 37 in Champ Bowl XXXIV?
2.Fake Answer : Jeff Dean
3.Question to Declarative Form : Quarterback Jeff Dean
is jersey number 37 in Champ Bowl XXXIV .
4.Grammatically Correct : Quarterback Jeff Dean had
jersey number 37 in Champ Bowl XXXIV .
7.3.2. A TTACK ON NEURAL MACHINE TRANSLATION
The work in (Belinkov & Bisk, 2017) studies the stability
of machine learning translation tools when their input sen-
tences are perturbed from natural errors (typos, misspellings,
etc.) and manually crafted distortions (letter replacement,
letter reorder). The experimental results show that the state-
of-arts translation models are vulnerable to both two types
of errors, and suggest adversarial training to improve the
model’s robustness.
Seq2Sick (Cheng et al., 2018) tries to attack seq2seq models
in neural machine translation and text summarization. In
their setting, two goals of attacking are set: to mislead the
model to generate an output which has on overlapping with
the ground truth, and to lead the model to produce an output
with targeted keywords. The model is treated as a white-boxand the attacking problem is formulated as an optimization
problem where they seek to solve a discrete perturbation by
minimizing a hinge-like loss function.
7.4. Dialogue Generation
Unlike the tasks above where success and failure are clearly
deﬁned, in the task of dialogue, there is no unique appropri-
ate response for a given context. Thus, instead of misleading
a well-trained model to produce incorrect outputs, works
about attacking dialogue models seek to explore the prop-
erty of neural dialogue models to be interfered by the per-
turbations on the inputs, or lead a model to output targeted
responses.
The work in (Niu & Bansal, 2018) explores the over-
sensitivity and over-stability of neural dialogue models by
using some heuristic techniques to modify original inputs
and observe the corresponding outputs. They evaluate the
robustness of dialogue models by checking whether the
outputs change signiﬁcantly with the modiﬁcations on the
inputs. They also investigate the effects that take place
when retraining the dialogue model using these adversarial
examples to improve the robustness and performance of the
underlying model.
In the work (He & Glass, 2018), the authors try to ﬁnd
trigger inputs which can lead a neural dialogue model to
generate targeted egregious responses. They design a search-
based method to determine the word in the input that max-
imizes the generative probability of the targeted response.
Then, they treat the dialogue model as a white-box and
take advantage of the gradient information to narrow the
search space. Finally they show that this method works for
“normal” targeted responses which are decoding results for
some input sentences, but for manually written malicious
responses, it hardly succeeds.
The work (Liu et al., 2019) treats the neural dialogue model
as a black-box and adopts a reinforcement learning frame-
work to effectively ﬁnd trigger inputs for targeted responses.
The black-box setting is stricter but more realistic, while
the requirements for the generated responses are properly
relaxed. The generated responses are expected to be se-
mantically identical to the targeted ones but not necessarily
exactly match with them.
8. Adversarial Examples in Miscellaneous
Tasks
In this section, we summarize some adversarial attacks in
other domains. Some of these domains are safety-critical,
so the studies on adversarial examples in these domains are
also important.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
8.1. Computer Vision Beyond Image Classiﬁcation
1.Face Recognition
The work (Sharif et al., 2016) seeks to attack face
recognition models on both a digital level and physical
level. The main victim model is based on the architec-
ture in (Parkhi et al.), which is a 39-layer DNN model
for face recognition tasks. The attack on the digital
level is based on traditional attacks, like Szegedy’s
L-BFGS method (Section 3.1.2).
Beyond digital-level adversarial faces, they also suc-
ceed in misleading face recognition models on physical
level. They achieve this by asking subjects to wear their
3D printed sunglasses frames. The authors optimize
the color of these glasses by attacking the model on a
digital level: by considering various adversarial glasses
and the most effective adversarial glasses are used for
attack. As shown in Figure 13, an adversary wears the
adversarial glasses and successfully fool the detection
of victim face recognition system.
Figure 13. An adversary (left) wears a pair of adversarial glasses
and is recognized as a movie-star, Milla Jovovich. (Image Credit:
(Sharif et al., 2016))
2.Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation
There are also studies on semantic segmentation and
object detection models in computer vision (Xie et al.,
2017b; Metzen et al., 2017b). In both semantic segmen-
tation and object detection tasks, the goal is to learn a
model that associates an input image xwith a series
of labelsY=fy1;y2;:::yNg. Semantic segmentation
models give each pixel of xa labelyi, so that the im-
age is divided to different segments. Similarly, object
detection models label all proposals (regions where the
objects lie).
The work (Xie et al., 2017b) can generate an adversar-
ial perturbation on xwhich can cause the classiﬁer to
give wrong prediction on all the output labels of the
model, in order to fool either semantic segmentation
or object detection models. The work (Metzen et al.,
2017b) ﬁnds that there exists universal perturbation for
any input image for semantic segmentation models.8.2. Video Adversarial Examples
Most works concentrate on attacking static image classiﬁ-
cation models. However, success on image attacks cannot
guarantee that there exist adversarial examples on videos
and video classiﬁcation systems. The work (Li et al., 2018b)
uses GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014a) to generate a dynamic
perturbation on video clips that can mislead the classiﬁca-
tion of video classiﬁers.
8.3. Generative Models
The work (Kos et al., 2018) attacks the variational autoen-
coder (V AE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) and V AE-GAN
(Larsen et al., 2015). Both V AE and V AE-GAN use an en-
coder to project the input image xinto a lower-dimensional
latent representation z, and a decoder to reconstruct a new
image ^xfromz. The reconstructed image should maintain
the same semantics as the original image. In (Kos et al.,
2018)’s attack setting, they aim to slightly perturb the in-
put imagexfed to encoder, which will cause the decoder
to generate image fdec(fenc(x))having different meaning
from the input x. For example, in MNIST dataset, the input
image is ”1”, and the reconstructed image is ”0”.
8.4. Malware Detection
The existence of adversarial examples in safety-critical tasks,
such as malware detection, should be paid much attention.
The work (Grosse et al., 2016) built a DNN model on the
DREBIN dataset by (Arp et al., 2014), which contains
120,000 Android application samples, where over 5,000
are malware samples. The trained model has 97% accuracy,
but malware samples can evade the classiﬁer if attackers add
fake features to them. Some other works (Hu & Tan, 2017;
Anderson et al., 2016) consider using GANs (Goodfellow
et al., 2014a) to generate adversarial malware.
8.5. Fingerprint Recognizer Attacks
Fingerprint recognition systems are also one of the most
safety-critical ﬁelds where machine learning models are
adopted. While, there are adversarial attacks undermining
the reliability of these models. For example, ﬁngerprint
spoof attacks copy an authorized person’s ﬁngerprint and
replicate it on some special materials such as liquid latex
or gelatin. Traditional ﬁngerprint recognition techniques
especially minutiae-based models fail to distinguish the
ﬁngerprint images generated from different materials. The
works (Chugh & Jain, 2018; Chugh et al., 2018) design a
modiﬁed CNN to effectively detect the ﬁngerprint spoof
attack.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
Figure 14. Left ﬁgure: the brick takes correct actions to go up
to catch the ball. Right ﬁgure: the current state is perturbed by
changing one pixel. The policy gives an incorrect command to go
down. (Image Credit: (Huang et al., 2017))
8.6. Reinforcement Learning
Different from classiﬁcation tasks, deep reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) aims to learn how to perform some human tasks,
such as play Atari 2600 games (Mnih et al., 2013) or play
Go (Silver et al., 2016b). For example, to play an Atari
game Pong , (Figure 14-left), the trained model takes input
from the latest images of game video (state - x), and outputs
a decision to move up or down (action - y). The learned
model can be viewed as a rule (policy - ) to win the game
(reward -L(;x;y )). A simple sketch can be: x !y,
which is in parallel to classiﬁcation tasks: xf  !y. The RL
algorithms are trained to learn the parameters of .
The work (Huang et al., 2017) shows that deep reinforce-
ment learning models are also vulnerable to adversarial
examples. Their approach is inherited from FGSM (Good-
fellow et al., 2014b), to take one-step gradient on the state
x(latest images of game video) to craft a fake state x0. The
policy’s decision on x0can be totally useless to achieve the
reward. Their results show that a slight perturbation on RL
models’ state, can cause large difference on the models’
decision and performance. Their work shows that Deep
Q Learning (Mnih et al., 2013), TRPO (Schulman et al.,
2015) and A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) are all vulnerable to their
attacks.
9. Conclusion
In this survey, we give a systemic, categorical and compre-
hensive overview on the recent works regarding adversarial
examples and their countermeasures, in multiple data do-
mains. We summarize the studies from each section in
the chronological order as shown in Appendix B, because
these works are released with relatively high frequency in
response to one another. The current state-of-the-art attackswill likely be neutralized by new defenses, and these de-
fenses will subsequently be circumvented. We hope that
our work can shed some light on the main ideas of adversar-
ial learning and related applications in order to encourage
progress in the ﬁeld.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Science Founda-
tion (NSF) under grant numbers IIS-1845081 and CNS-
1815636.
References
Alzantot, M., Sharma, Y ., Chakraborty, S., and Srivastava, M.
Genattack: Practical black-box attacks with gradient-free opti-
mization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11090 , 2018.
Anderson, H. S., Woodbridge, J., and Filar, B. Deepdga:
Adversarially-tuned domain generation and detection. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Security , pp. 13–21. ACM, 2016.
Arp, D., Spreitzenbarth, M., Gascon, H., Rieck, K., and Siemens,
C. Drebin: Effective and explainable detection of android
malware in your pocket. 2014.
Athalye, A., Engstrom, L., Ilyas, A., and Kwok, K. Synthesizing
robust adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.07397 ,
2017.
Athalye, A., Carlini, N., and Wagner, D. Obfuscated gradients give
a false sense of security: Circumventing defenses to adversarial
examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.00420 , 2018.
Barreno, M., Nelson, B., Joseph, A. D., and Tygar, J. D. The
security of machine learning. Machine Learning , 81(2):121–
148, 2010.
Belinkov, Y . and Bisk, Y . Synthetic and natural noise both break
neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.02173 ,
2017.
Biggio, B., Nelson, B., and Laskov, P. Poisoning attacks against
support vector machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6389 , 2012.
Biggio, B., Corona, I., Maiorca, D., Nelson, B., ˇSrndi ´c, N., Laskov,
P., Giacinto, G., and Roli, F. Evasion attacks against machine
learning at test time. In Joint European conference on machine
learning and knowledge discovery in databases , pp. 387–402.
Springer, 2013.
Bojcheski, A. and G ¨unnemann, S. Adversarial attacks on node
embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.01093 , 2018.
Buckman, J., Roy, A., Raffel, C., and Goodfellow, I. Thermometer
encoding: One hot way to resist adversarial examples. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=S18Su--CW .
Carlini, N. and Wagner, D. Adversarial examples are not easily
detected: Bypassing ten detection methods. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security ,
pp. 3–14. ACM, 2017a.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
Carlini, N. and Wagner, D. Towards evaluating the robustness of
neural networks. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP) , pp. 39–57. IEEE, 2017b.
Carlini, N. and Wagner, D. Audio adversarial examples: Targeted
attacks on speech-to-text. In 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy
Workshops (SPW) , pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2018.
Carlini, N., Katz, G., Barrett, C., and Dill, D. L. Provably
minimally-distorted adversarial examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.10207 , 2017.
Cauwenberghs, G. and Poggio, T. Incremental and decremen-
tal support vector machine learning. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pp. 409–415, 2001.
Chen, P.-Y ., Zhang, H., Sharma, Y ., Yi, J., and Hsieh, C.-J. Zoo:
Zeroth order optimization based black-box attacks to deep neu-
ral networks without training substitute models. In Proceedings
of the 10th ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Secu-
rity, pp. 15–26. ACM, 2017.
Chen, P.-Y ., Sharma, Y ., Zhang, H., Yi, J., and Hsieh, C.-J. Ead:
elastic-net attacks to deep neural networks via adversarial exam-
ples. In Thirty-second AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence ,
2018.
Cheng, M., Yi, J., Zhang, H., Chen, P.-Y ., and Hsieh, C.-
J. Seq2sick: Evaluating the robustness of sequence-to-
sequence models with adversarial examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.01128 , 2018.
Chugh, T. and Jain, A. K. Fingerprint presentation attack detection:
Generalization and efﬁciency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.11574 ,
2018.
Chugh, T., Cao, K., and Jain, A. K. Fingerprint spoof buster: Use of
minutiae-centered patches. IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security , 13(9):2190–2202, 2018.
Cires ¸An, D., Meier, U., Masci, J., and Schmidhuber, J. Multi-
column deep neural network for trafﬁc sign classiﬁcation. Neu-
ral networks , 32:333–338, 2012.
Cisse, M., Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Dauphin, Y ., and Usunier,
N. Parseval networks: Improving robustness to adversarial
examples. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Machine Learning-Volume 70 , pp. 854–863. JMLR. org,
2017.
Dai, H., Li, H., Tian, T., Huang, X., Wang, L., Zhu, J., and Song,
L. Adversarial attack on graph structured data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.02371 , 2018.
Dalvi, N., Domingos, P., Sanghai, S., Verma, D., et al. Adversarial
classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD inter-
national conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining ,
pp. 99–108. ACM, 2004.
Deb, D., Zhang, J., and Jain, A. K. Advfaces: Adversarial face
synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.05008 , 2019.
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Li, K., and Fei-Fei, L.
Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.Dhillon, G. S., Azizzadenesheli, K., Lipton, Z. C., Bernstein,
J., Kossaiﬁ, J., Khanna, A., and Anandkumar, A. Stochastic
activation pruning for robust adversarial defense. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.01442 , 2018.
Dong, Y ., Liao, F., Pang, T., Su, H., Zhu, J., Hu, X., and Li, J.
Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pp. 9185–9193, 2018.
Ebrahimi, J., Rao, A., Lowd, D., and Dou, D. Hotﬂip: White-
box adversarial examples for text classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.06751 , 2017.
Eykholt, K., Evtimov, I., Fernandes, E., Li, B., Rahmati, A.,
Xiao, C., Prakash, A., Kohno, T., and Song, D. Robust
physical-world attacks on deep learning models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.08945 , 2017.
Fawzi, A., Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.-M., and Frossard, P. Robustness
of classiﬁers: from adversarial to random noise. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 1632–1640, 2016.
Fawzi, A., Fawzi, O., and Frossard, P. Analysis of classiﬁers
robustness to adversarial perturbations. Machine Learning , 107
(3):481–508, 2018.
Feinman, R., Curtin, R. R., Shintre, S., and Gardner, A. B.
Detecting adversarial samples from artifacts. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.00410 , 2017.
Feng, F., He, X., Tang, J., and Chua, T.-S. Graph adversarial
training: Dynamically regularizing based on graph structure.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08226 , 2019.
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Model-agnostic meta-learning
for fast adaptation of deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 , pp.
1126–1135. JMLR. org, 2017.
Gao, J., Lanchantin, J., Soffa, M. L., and Qi, Y . Black-box gen-
eration of adversarial text sequences to evade deep learning
classiﬁers. In 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops
(SPW) , pp. 50–56. IEEE, 2018.
Gong, Z., Wang, W., and Ku, W.-S. Adversarial and clean data are
not twins. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04960 , 2017.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-
Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y . Generative
adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pp. 2672–2680, 2014a.
Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J., and Szegedy, C. Explaining and har-
nessing adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 ,
2014b.
Gretton, A., Borgwardt, K. M., Rasch, M. J., Sch ¨olkopf, B., and
Smola, A. A kernel two-sample test. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , 13(Mar):723–773, 2012.
Grosse, K., Papernot, N., Manoharan, P., Backes, M., and
McDaniel, P. Adversarial perturbations against deep neu-
ral networks for malware classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.04435 , 2016.
Grosse, K., Manoharan, P., Papernot, N., Backes, M., and Mc-
Daniel, P. On the (statistical) detection of adversarial examples.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.06280 , 2017.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
Gu, S. and Rigazio, L. Towards deep neural network architectures
robust to adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5068 ,
2014.
Guo, C., Rana, M., Cisse, M., and Van Der Maaten, L. Countering
adversarial images using input transformations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.00117 , 2017.
Hannun, A., Case, C., Casper, J., Catanzaro, B., Diamos, G., Elsen,
E., Prenger, R., Satheesh, S., Sengupta, S., Coates, A., et al.
Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.5567 , 2014.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 770–778, 2016.
He, T. and Glass, J. Detecting egregious responses
in neural sequence-to-sequence models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.04113 , 2018.
Hein, M. and Andriushchenko, M. Formal guarantees on the
robustness of a classiﬁer against adversarial manipulation. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 2266–
2276, 2017.
Hendrycks, D. and Gimpel, K. Early methods for detecting adver-
sarial images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.00530 , 2016.
Hinton, G., Deng, L., Yu, D., Dahl, G., Mohamed, A.-r., Jaitly,
N., Senior, A., Vanhoucke, V ., Nguyen, P., Kingsbury, B., et al.
Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recogni-
tion. IEEE Signal processing magazine , 29, 2012.
Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., and Dean, J. Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory.
Neural computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
Hu, W. and Tan, Y . Generating adversarial malware exam-
ples for black-box attacks based on gan. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05983 , 2017.
Huang, S., Papernot, N., Goodfellow, I., Duan, Y ., and Abbeel, P.
Adversarial attacks on neural network policies. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.02284 , 2017.
Ilyas, A., Engstrom, L., Athalye, A., and Lin, J. Black-box ad-
versarial attacks with limited queries and information. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.08598 , 2018.
Ilyas, A., Santurkar, S., Tsipras, D., Engstrom, L., Tran, B., and
Madry, A. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02175 , 2019.
Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1502.03167 , 2015.
Iyyer, M., Wieting, J., Gimpel, K., and Zettlemoyer, L. Adversarial
example generation with syntactically controlled paraphrase
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06059 , 2018.
Jia, R. and Liang, P. Adversarial examples for evaluating read-
ing comprehension systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.07328 ,
2017.Katz, G., Barrett, C., Dill, D. L., Julian, K., and Kochenderfer,
M. J. Reluplex: An efﬁcient smt solver for verifying deep
neural networks. In International Conference on Computer
Aided Veriﬁcation , pp. 97–117. Springer, 2017.
Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013.
Kipf, T. N. and Welling, M. Semi-supervised classiﬁca-
tion with graph convolutional networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.02907 , 2016.
Koh, P. W. and Liang, P. Understanding black-box predictions via
inﬂuence functions. In Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 , pp. 1885–1894.
JMLR. org, 2017.
Kos, J., Fischer, I., and Song, D. Adversarial examples for gener-
ative models. In 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops
(SPW) , pp. 36–42. IEEE, 2018.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. Imagenet classiﬁ-
cation with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pp. 1097–1105, 2012.
Kurakin, A., Goodfellow, I., and Bengio, S. Adversarial machine
learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01236 , 2016a.
Kurakin, A., Goodfellow, I., and Bengio, S. Adversarial examples
in the physical world. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02533 , 2016b.
Larsen, A. B. L., Sønderby, S. K., Larochelle, H., and Winther, O.
Autoencoding beyond pixels using a learned similarity metric.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.09300 , 2015.
Lei, Q., Wu, L., Chen, P., Dimakis, A. G., Dhillon, I. S., and
Witbrock, M. Discrete attacks and submodular optimization
with applications to text classiﬁcation. CoRR , abs/1812.00151,
2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00151 .
Li, J., Ji, S., Du, T., Li, B., and Wang, T. Textbugger: Generating
adversarial text against real-world applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.05271 , 2018a.
Li, S., Neupane, A., Paul, S., Song, C., Krishnamurthy, S. V .,
Chowdhury, A. K. R., and Swami, A. Adversarial perturbations
against real-time video classiﬁcation systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.00458 , 2018b.
Liang, B., Li, H., Su, M., Bian, P., Li, X., and Shi, W. Deep text
classiﬁcation can be fooled. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.08006 ,
2017.
Liu, D. C. and Nocedal, J. On the limited memory bfgs method
for large scale optimization. Mathematical programming , 45
(1-3):503–528, 1989.
Liu, H., Derr, T., Liu, Z., and Tang, J. Say what i want: To-
wards the dark side of neural dialogue models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.06044 , 2019.
Ma, Y ., Wang, S., Wu, L., and Tang, J. Attacking graph convolu-
tional networks via rewiring. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03750 ,
2019.
Madry, A., Makelov, A., Schmidt, L., Tsipras, D., and Vladu, A.
Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083 , 2017.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
Metzen, J. H., Genewein, T., Fischer, V ., and Bischoff, B.
On detecting adversarial perturbations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.04267 , 2017a.
Metzen, J. H., Kumar, M. C., Brox, T., and Fischer, V . Universal
adversarial perturbations against semantic image segmentation.
In2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) , pp. 2774–2783. IEEE, 2017b.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., and Dean,
J. Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pp. 3111–3119, 2013.
Miyato, T., Maeda, S.-i., Koyama, M., Nakae, K., and Ishii, S.
Distributional smoothing with virtual adversarial training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1507.00677 , 2015.
Miyato, T., Dai, A. M., and Goodfellow, I. Adversarial training
methods for semi-supervised text classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.07725 , 2016.
Mnih, V ., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A., Antonoglou,
I., Wierstra, D., and Riedmiller, M. Playing atari with deep
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013.
Mnih, V ., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T., Harley,
T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asynchronous methods for
deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on
machine learning , pp. 1928–1937, 2016.
Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.-M., Fawzi, A., and Frossard, P. Deepfool: a
simple and accurate method to fool deep neural networks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pp. 2574–2582, 2016.
Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.-M., Fawzi, A., Fawzi, O., and Frossard,
P. Universal adversarial perturbations. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 1765–1773, 2017a.
Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.-M., Fawzi, A., Fawzi, O., Frossard, P., and
Soatto, S. Analysis of universal adversarial perturbations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.09554 , 2017b.
Niu, T. and Bansal, M. Adversarial over-sensitivity and over-
stability strategies for dialogue models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.02079 , 2018.
Odena, A., Olah, C., and Shlens, J. Conditional image synthesis
with auxiliary classiﬁer gans. In Proceedings of the 34th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 , pp.
2642–2651. JMLR. org, 2017.
Papernot, N., McDaniel, P., Jha, S., Fredrikson, M., Celik, Z. B.,
and Swami, A. The limitations of deep learning in adversarial
settings. In 2016 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
Privacy (EuroS&P) , pp. 372–387. IEEE, 2016a.
Papernot, N., McDaniel, P., Wu, X., Jha, S., and Swami, A. Dis-
tillation as a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep
neural networks. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP) , pp. 582–597. IEEE, 2016b.
Papernot, N., McDaniel, P., Goodfellow, I., Jha, S., Celik, Z. B.,
and Swami, A. Practical black-box attacks against machine
learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia conference
on computer and communications security , pp. 506–519. ACM,
2017.Parkhi, O. M., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A., et al. Deep face recog-
nition.
Perozzi, B., Al-Rfou, R., and Skiena, S. Deepwalk: Online learn-
ing of social representations. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining , pp. 701–710. ACM, 2014.
Pontryagin, L. S. Mathematical theory of optimal processes . Rout-
ledge, 2018.
Raghunathan, A., Steinhardt, J., and Liang, P. Certiﬁed defenses
against adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09344 ,
2018a.
Raghunathan, A., Steinhardt, J., and Liang, P. S. Semideﬁnite
relaxations for certifying robustness to adversarial examples.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp.
10877–10887, 2018b.
Rifai, S., Vincent, P., Muller, X., Glorot, X., and Bengio, Y . Con-
tractive auto-encoders: Explicit invariance during feature extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 833–840.
Omnipress, 2011.
Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma,
S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla, A., Bernstein, M., Berg,
A. C., and Fei-Fei, L. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) ,
115(3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Samangouei, P., Kabkab, M., and Chellappa, R. Defense-gan:
Protecting classiﬁers against adversarial attacks using generative
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06605 , 2018.
Samanta, S. and Mehta, S. Towards crafting text adversarial sam-
ples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.02812 , 2017.
Schmidt, L., Santurkar, S., Tsipras, D., Talwar, K., and Madry,
A. Adversarially robust generalization requires more data. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 5014–
5026, 2018.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz, P.
Trust region policy optimization. In International conference
on machine learning , pp. 1889–1897, 2015.
Shafahi, A., Huang, W. R., Najibi, M., Suciu, O., Studer, C.,
Dumitras, T., and Goldstein, T. Poison frogs! targeted clean-
label poisoning attacks on neural networks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 6103–6113, 2018a.
Shafahi, A., Huang, W. R., Studer, C., Feizi, S., and Goldstein,
T. Are adversarial examples inevitable? arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.02104 , 2018b.
Shafahi, A., Najibi, M., Ghiasi, A., Xu, Z., Dickerson, J., Studer,
C., Davis, L. S., Taylor, G., and Goldstein, T. Adversarial
training for free! arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12843 , 2019.
Sharif, M., Bhagavatula, S., Bauer, L., and Reiter, M. K. Acces-
sorize to a crime: Real and stealthy attacks on state-of-the-art
face recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pp.
1528–1540. ACM, 2016.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
Sharma, Y . and Chen, P.-Y . Attacking the madry defense
model with l1-based adversarial examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.10733 , 2017.
Sharma, Y . and Chen, P.-Y . Bypassing feature squeezing by in-
creasing adversary strength. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.09868 ,
2018.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., van den
Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershel-
vam, V ., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S., Grewe, D., Nham, J., Kalch-
brenner, N., Sutskever, I., Lillicrap, T., Leach, M., Kavukcuoglu,
K., Graepel, T., and Hassabis, D. Mastering the game of go
with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature , 529:484–
503, 2016a. URL http://www.nature.com/nature/
journal/v529/n7587/full/nature16961.html .
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Van
Den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneer-
shelvam, V ., Lanctot, M., et al. Mastering the game of go with
deep neural networks and tree search. nature , 529(7587):484,
2016b.
Sinha, A., Namkoong, H., and Duchi, J. Certifying some distri-
butional robustness with principled adversarial training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.10571 , 2017.
Song, Y ., Kim, T., Nowozin, S., Ermon, S., and Kushman,
N. Pixeldefend: Leveraging generative models to under-
stand and defend against adversarial examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.10766 , 2017.
Song, Y ., Shu, R., Kushman, N., and Ermon, S. Constructing
unrestricted adversarial examples with generative models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 8312–
8323, 2018.
Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and
Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural
networks from overﬁtting. The journal of machine learning
research , 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Stutz, D., Hein, M., and Schiele, B. Disentangling adversarial
robustness and generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp.
6976–6987, 2019.
Su, D., Zhang, H., Chen, H., Yi, J., Chen, P.-Y ., and Gao, Y . Is
robustness the cost of accuracy?–a comprehensive study on the
robustness of 18 deep image classiﬁcation models. In Proceed-
ings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,
pp. 631–648, 2018.
Su, J., Vargas, D. V ., and Sakurai, K. One pixel attack for fooling
deep neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation , 2019.
Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D.,
Goodfellow, I., and Fergus, R. Intriguing properties of neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199 , 2013.
Tjeng, V ., Xiao, K., and Tedrake, R. Evaluating robustness of neu-
ral networks with mixed integer programming. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.07356 , 2017.
Tram `er, F., Kurakin, A., Papernot, N., Goodfellow, I., Boneh, D.,
and McDaniel, P. Ensemble adversarial training: Attacks and
defenses. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07204 , 2017.Tsipras, D., Santurkar, S., Engstrom, L., Turner, A., and Madry,
A. Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.12152 , 2018.
Van den Oord, A., Kalchbrenner, N., Espeholt, L., Vinyals, O.,
Graves, A., et al. Conditional image generation with pixelcnn
decoders. In Advances in neural information processing systems ,
pp. 4790–4798, 2016.
Vandenberghe, L. and Boyd, S. Semideﬁnite programming. SIAM
review , 38(1):49–95, 1996.
Wierstra, D., Schaul, T., Glasmachers, T., Sun, Y ., Peters, J., and
Schmidhuber, J. Natural evolution strategies. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 15(1):949–980, 2014.
Wong, E. and Kolter, J. Z. Provable defenses against adversarial
examples via the convex outer adversarial polytope. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.00851 , 2017.
Wong, E., Schmidt, F., Metzen, J. H., and Kolter, J. Z. Scaling prov-
able adversarial defenses. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 8400–8409, 2018.
Xiao, C., Li, B., Zhu, J.-Y ., He, W., Liu, M., and Song, D. Gen-
erating adversarial examples with adversarial networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.02610 , 2018a.
Xiao, C., Zhu, J.-Y ., Li, B., He, W., Liu, M., and Song, D.
Spatially transformed adversarial examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.02612 , 2018b.
Xiao, K. Y ., Tjeng, V ., Shaﬁullah, N. M., and Madry, A. Training
for faster adversarial robustness veriﬁcation via inducing relu
stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.03008 , 2018c.
Xie, C., Wang, J., Zhang, Z., Ren, Z., and Yuille, A. Mitigat-
ing adversarial effects through randomization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.01991 , 2017a.
Xie, C., Wang, J., Zhang, Z., Zhou, Y ., Xie, L., and Yuille, A.
Adversarial examples for semantic segmentation and object
detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision , pp. 1369–1378, 2017b.
Xu, K., Chen, H., Liu, S., Chen, P.-Y ., Weng, T.-W., Hong, M., and
Lin, X. Topology attack and defense for graph neural networks:
An optimization perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04214 ,
2019.
Xu, W., Evans, D., and Qi, Y . Feature squeezing: Detecting
adversarial examples in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.01155 , 2017.
Zhang, D., Zhang, T., Lu, Y ., Zhu, Z., and Dong, B. You only
propagate once: Painless adversarial training using maximal
principle. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00877 , 2019a.
Zhang, H., Yu, Y ., Jiao, J., Xing, E. P., Ghaoui, L. E., and Jordan,
M. I. Theoretically principled trade-off between robustness and
accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08573 , 2019b.
Z¨ugner, D. and G ¨unnemann, S. Adversarial attacks on graph neural
networks via meta learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08412 ,
2019.
Z¨ugner, D., Akbarnejad, A., and G ¨unnemann, S. Adversarial
attacks on neural networks for graph data. In Proceedings of the
24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining , pp. 2847–2856. ACM, 2018.
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A ReviewAppendix
A. Dichotomy of Attacks
Attack Publication Similarity Attacking Capability Algorithm Apply Domain
L-BFGS (Szegedy et al., 2013) l2 White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2014b) l1,l2 White-Box Single-Step Image Classiﬁcation
Deepfool (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016) l2 White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
JSMA (Papernot et al., 2016a) l2 White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
BIM (Kurakin et al., 2016a) l1 White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
C & W (Carlini & Wagner, 2017b) l2 White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
Ground Truth (Carlini et al., 2017) l0 White-Box SMT solver Image Classiﬁcation
Spatial (Xiao et al., 2018b) Total Variation White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
Universal (Metzen et al., 2017b) l1,l2 White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
One-Pixel (Su et al., 2019) l0 White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
EAD (Chen et al., 2018) l1+l2,l2 White-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
Substitute (Papernot et al., 2017) lp Black-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
ZOO (Chen et al., 2017) lp Black-Box Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
Biggio (Biggio et al., 2012) l2 Poisoning Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
Explanation (Koh & Liang, 2017) lp Poisoning Iterative Image Classiﬁcation
Zugner’s (Z¨ugner et al., 2018) Degree Distribution, Coocurrence Poisoning Greedy Node Classiﬁcation
Dai’s (Dai et al., 2018) Edges Black-Box RL Node & Graph Classiﬁcation
Meta (Z¨ugner & G ¨unnemann, 2019) Edges Black-Box RL Node Classiﬁcation
C & W (Carlini & Wagner, 2018) max dB White-Box Iterative Speech Recognition
Word Embedding (Miyato et al., 2016) lp White-Box One-Step Text Classiﬁcation
HotFlip (Ebrahimi et al., 2017) letters White-Box Greedy Text Classiﬁcation
Jia & Liang (Jia & Liang, 2017) letters Black-Box Greedy Reading Comprehension
Face Recognition (Sharif et al., 2016) physical White-Box Iterative Face Recognition
RL attack (Huang et al., 2017) lp White-Box RL
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in Images, Graphs and Text: A Review
B. Dichotomy of Defenses
Defenses
Gradient Masking Robust Optimization Detection
Shattered Gradient
(Buckman et al., 2018)
(Guo et al., 2017)
Shattered Gradient
(Dhillon et al., 2018)
(Xie et al., 2017a)
Exploding/Vanishing Gra-
dient
(Song et al., 2017)
(Samangouei et al., 2018)
(Papernot et al., 2016b)Auxilliary Model
(Grosse et al., 2016)
(Gong et al., 2017)
(Metzen et al., 2017a)
Statistical Methods
(Hendrycks & Gimpel,
2016)
(Grosse et al., 2017)
(Gretton et al., 2012)
Check Consistency
(Feinman et al., 2017)
(Xu et al., 2017)Adversarial Training
(Goodfellow et al., 2014b)
(Madry et al., 2017)
(Tram `er et al., 2017)
(Sinha et al., 2017)
Certiﬁed Defense
(Wong & Kolter, 2017)
(Hein & Andriushchenko,
2017)
(Raghunathan et al.,
2018a)
(Sinha et al., 2017)
Regularization
(Cisse et al., 2017)
(Gu & Rigazio, 2014)
(Rifai et al., 2011)