Title: Language Models that Seek for Knowledge: Modular Search & Generation for Dialogue and Prompt Completion

Language Models that Seek for Knowledge:
Modular Search & Generation for Dialogue and Prompt Completion
Kurt Shuster
Facebook AI ResearchMojtaba Komeili
Facebook AI ResearchLeonard Adolphs
ETH Zürich
Stephen Roller
Facebook AI ResearchArthur Szlam
Facebook AI ResearchJason Weston
Facebook AI Research
Abstract
Language models (LMs) have recently been
shown to generate more factual responses by
employing modularity (Zhou et al., 2021) in
combination with retrieval (Adolphs et al.,
2021). We extend the recent approach of
Adolphs et al. (2021) to include internet
search as a module. Our SeeKeR (Se arch-
engine!Knowledge!Response) method thus
applies a single LM to three modular tasks
in succession: search, generating knowl-
edge, and generating a ﬁnal response. We
show that, when using SeeKeR as a dia-
logue model, it outperforms the state-of-the-
art model BlenderBot 2 (Chen et al., 2021)
on open-domain knowledge-grounded conver-
sations for the same number of parameters,
in terms of consistency, knowledge and per-
turn engagingness. SeeKeR applied to topi-
cal prompt completions as a standard language
model outperforms GPT2 (Radford et al.,
2019) and GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) in terms
of factuality and topicality, despite GPT3 be-
ing a vastly larger model. Our code and mod-
els are made publicly available1.
1 Introduction
Standard large language models are known to gen-
erate ﬂuent but factually incorrect statements, a
problem that is not solved by just increasing their
size (Shuster et al., 2021). Additionally, as their
knowledge is frozen in time from the point when
they were trained, they can never learn new facts –
the newest information they have will be from the
date that the training set was constructed. Several
recent advances have tried to tackle aspects of these
problems. Neural retrieval models have augmented
seq2seq models with access to a large ﬁxed cor-
pus of knowledge (Lee et al., 2019a; Lewis et al.,
2020b). However, aggregating information from
multiple retrieved documents is a difﬁcult problem
Work done during a Facebook AI Research internship.
1http://parl.ai/projects/seeker
Search:  Beyonce 2022 
Search Engine 
Knowledge:  According to 
Sony Music's CEO, the star 
will be releasing her album in 
the ﬁrst quarter of 2022.  
retrieved documents In 2022, Beyoncé has plans to.. 
In 2022, Beyoncé has plans to.. 
In 2022, Beyoncé has plans to.. 
Response:  release a new album early 
in the year. Figure 1: The modular Se arch-e ngine!Knowledge
!Response (SeeKeR) Language Model. A single
transformer architecture is called successively to in-
voke three different modules: search, generate knowl-
edge, and generate ﬁnal response. The output of each
module is input to the next, in addition to the original
context.
(Izacard and Grave, 2021b) which may result in
incorporating parts of multiple documents into one
factually incorrect response. A modular approach
which ﬁrst ﬁnds the relevant parts of the docu-
ments and then generates the ﬁnal response has
been shown to help alleviate this problem (Adolphs
et al., 2021). However, none of those methods
can incorporate new information, which has been
studied in separate work that augments generations
with internet search (Komeili et al., 2021).
In this paper, we explore a modular architecture
that tries to mix the best elements of these different
existing solutions. A single transformer architec-
ture is used iteratively to perform three modular
tasks: search, generate knowledge, and generate a
ﬁnal response, where the output of each module isarXiv:2203.13224v2  [cs.CL]  29 Mar 2022
fed as additional input to the next, as in Figure 1.
The ﬁrst step, given the input context, generates a
relevant search query for an internet search engine,
while the second step is fed the returned documents
and generates their most relevant portion. The last
step uses that knowledge to produce its ﬁnal re-
sponse. By decomposing this difﬁcult problem into
three manageable steps, pertinent up-to-date infor-
mation can be incorporated into the ﬁnal language
model generation.
We apply our modular Search- engine!
Knowledg e!Response (SeeKeR) language
model to the tasks of dialogue and prompt
completion, after pre-training and ﬁne-tuning
on a variety of knowledge-intensive datasets. In
open-domain dialogue, we show this approach
outperforms the state-of-the-art BlenderBot 2
model of Chen et al. (2021) according to human
ratings of consistency, knowledge and per-turn
engagingness.
We test the ability of SeeKeR to perform general
– but up-to-date – language modeling. To do this
we construct topical prompts on subjects that were
in the news in January 2022, which is data that
the model itself has not been trained on. With
SeeKeR’s ability to incorporate information via
web search, it outperforms GPT2 (Radford et al.,
2019) and GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) in terms of
factuality and topicality according to human raters.
2 Related Work
Our work builds on the knowledge to response
(K2R) technique (Adolphs et al., 2021) which de-
composes a dialogue model into two stages: gen-
erating a knowledge sequence, followed by gen-
erating a response sequence, conditioned on the
knowledge. This was applied successfully to Wiz-
ard of Wikipedia (Dinan et al., 2019), QA (Lee
et al., 2019a) and LIGHT tasks (Urbanek et al.,
2019). We expand on this approach by adding the
additional module of internet search and then apply-
ing that to full open-domain dialogue and general
language modeling.
In the dialogue space, the most natural compari-
son to our approach is BlenderBot 2 (BB2) (Chen
et al., 2021). BB2 grounds on retrieval from the
internet for open-domain dialogue tasks (Komeili
et al., 2021), but does not use a modular approach to
generate knowledge, instead applying the fusion-in-
decoder (FiD) method (Izacard and Grave, 2021a)
to output a response directly given the retrieveddocuments. They, as well as others (Lee et al.,
2022), report that their method can have the prob-
lems of either mixing up facts together incorrectly
or generating a generic response that ignores the
knowledge, which our method attempts to address.
Another recent approach that uses information re-
trieval is LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022), where
the retrieval engine returns pertinent information
(rather than a set of documents) and is considered a
separate black box. LaMDA is not openly available
and cannot be compared to. WebGPT (Nakano
et al., 2021) also applies internet search to QA
tasks, as does the work of Lazaridou et al. (2022);
neither applies to dialogue or general LM tasks,
and neither work is openly available.
In the language modeling space, there is a large
body of work on nearest neighbor and cache-based
language modeling (Khandelwal et al., 2020; Grave
et al., 2017; Merity et al., 2017; Khandelwal et al.,
2021; Yogatama et al., 2021) for accessing a large
set of documents. Recently, RETRO (Borgeaud
et al., 2021) used retrieval over a database of tril-
lions of tokens. Those works do not use inter-
net search, but rather perform their own retrieval
method via a transformer model together with near-
est neighbor lookup. As the database is ﬁxed, that
means it would not be up to date with the lat-
est knowledge and current events. Some recent
methods have also attempted to adapt knowledge
through editing and tuning of language model vari-
ants (De Cao et al., 2021; Mitchell et al., 2022).
3 SeeKeR Model
The SeeKeR model we introduce in this paper has
the architecture of a standard transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017), except that this same encoder-decoder
(for dialogue) or decoder-only (for language mod-
eling) model is used in a modular way multiple
times. For each module, special tokens are used in
the encoder (or decoder) to indicate which module
is being invoked. The output of each module is
input into the next, along with the original context.
SeeKeR consists of three modules, which are
invoked sequentially:
Search Module Given the encoded input context,
a search query is generated. This is fed into a search
engine, which returns results in the form of a set of
documents. Following Komeili et al. (2021), in our
experiments (unless stated otherwise) we employ
the Bing Web Search API2to retrieve documents,
and then ﬁlter that set of documents by intersecting
with Common Crawl (Wenzek et al., 2020), and
keep the top 5.
Knowledge Module Given the encoded input
context, and a set of retrieved documents, a knowl-
edge response is generated. This consists of one
or more relevant phrases or sentences from the
retrieved documents. For encoder-decoder mod-
els, the documents and context are encoded using
the fusion-in-decoder (FiD) method (Izacard and
Grave, 2021a); for decoder-only models, we pack
and prepend the documents to the input context.
Note that this task is essentially a “copy” task in
that no new tokens have to be generated; the difﬁ-
culty of the task is selecting the relevant knowledge
to copy.
Response Module Given the encoded input con-
text concatenated with the knowledge response,
the ﬁnal response is generated. The module must
consider relevant context and knowledge while
generating a new ﬂuent continuation to the input.
The extraction of relevant knowledge by the previ-
ous modules makes this task easier; in contrast, a
conventional seq2seq model has to solve all these
tasks (knowledge acquisition, synthesis, and ﬁnal
response generation) at once.
3.1 Architecture and Pre-Training
For our standard language modeling experiments,
we consider the GPT2 transformer (Radford et al.,
2019) as a base model, and ﬁne-tune it to become
a SeeKeR model (see subsection 3.3); we do not
perform any pre-training of our own in this case.
We can thus directly compare to GPT2, with the
same model size and architecture. We consider
medium, large and XL (345M, 762M and 1.5B
parameters) models in our experiments.
For our dialogue experiments, we employ a 2.7B
parameter transformer encoder-decoder model. To
pre-train our model we consider combining two dif-
ferent pre-training datasets for language-modeling
and for dialogue, using the training method of
Lewis et al. (2020a):
pushshift.io Reddit We use a variant of Reddit
discussions, which has also been used in several ex-
isting studies, particularly for training BlenderBot
1 and 2 (Roller et al., 2021). The setup requires
2https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/bing/apis/
bing-web-search-apitraining to generate a comment conditioned on the
full thread leading up to the comment. Following
Humeau et al. (2019), this is a previously existing
Reddit dataset extracted and obtained by a third
party and made available on pushshift.io (Baum-
gartner et al., 2020), spanning 1.5B training exam-
ples from Reddit obtained from PushShift3through
July 2019. A number of heuristic rules have been
used to ﬁlter and clean the dataset; see Roller et al.
(2021) for details.
RoBERTa+CC100en We use the same data used
to train the BASE language model (Lewis et al.,
2021), which consists of approximately 100B to-
kens, combining corpora used in RoBERTa (Liu
et al., 2019) with the English subset of the CC100
corpus (Conneau et al., 2020).
We compare pre-training only on dialogue mod-
eling (pushshift.io Reddit, as in (Roller et al.,
2021)) to pre-training on both language model-
ing and dialogue modeling tasks; we refer to the
latter as R2C2 (pushshift.io Reddit, RoBERTa +
CC100en). Full details, including architectural and
pre-training hyperparameters, are discussed in Ap-
pendix B.
3.2 SeeKeR Tasks for Dialogue
We consider a number of dialogue-based ﬁne-
tuning tasks to enable our model to perform well
for each of the three modules.
Search Module Tasks We use data from the
Wizard of Internet (WizInt) task (Komeili et al.,
2021) which consists of 8,614 training dialogues
containing 42,306 human-authored relevant search
queries given the dialogue contexts. We can use
the search query data as targets to directly train the
search module in a supervised fashion. We append
special tokens to the input context to indicate that
the transformer is performing the search task, via
predicting a relevant search query.
Knowledge Module Tasks We multi-task sev-
eral knowledge-intensive NLP tasks, where the tar-
get for the model is the “knowledge” that will be
used to generate the ﬁnal response. We ﬁrst employ
knowledge grounded dialogue datasets that contain
annotations of the gold knowledge used: Wizard
of Internet (Komeili et al., 2021) and Wizard of
Wikipedia (WoW) (Dinan et al., 2019). We then use
several QA tasks: SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016),
TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017), Natural Questions
3https://files.pushshift.io/reddit/
(NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), and MS MARCO
(Nguyen et al., 2016). We use the “Natural Lan-
guage Generation” competition track (NLGen v2.1)
of MS MARCO, in which the annotator must “pro-
vide your answer in a way in which it could be read
from a smart speaker and make sense without any
additional context”4. As such, the original targets
do not have direct overlap with one of the input
documents, so we modify the task to satisfy this
constraint by ﬁnding the highest overlapping input
sentence with the answer, and make that the target
instead. If the F1 overlap is less than 0.5 we drop
the example, leaving 281,658 examples out of the
original 808,731. For NQ, we use three different
settings: with all documents as input, with only
the gold document, and with a sampled dialogue
history context, following (Adolphs et al., 2021).
Finally, we can employ conventional dialogue tasks
in this setting as well – PersonaChat (Zhang et al.,
2018), Empathetic Dialogues (ED) (Rashkin et al.,
2019) and Blended Skill Talk (BST) (Smith et al.,
2020) – by using the same procedure as in (Adolphs
et al., 2021): we extract an entity from the original
dialogue response that also appears in the context,
and set that as the knowledge target for training.
We also employ the Multi-Session Chat (MSC) (Xu
et al., 2021) task, using the same approach as for
MS MARCO to predict the most similar previous
line to the original target (with the same F1 overlap
threshold) and setting that as the knowledge target.
Response Module Tasks We use a subset of the
knowledge tasks for the response tasks as well,
but with modiﬁed inputs and targets. In this case,
the input context contains the usual dialogue, con-
catenated to the gold knowledge response (the tar-
get in the previous task), surrounded by special
tokens. The new target is the standard dialogue
response from the original dataset. For example,
in the MS MARCO case, this involves mapping
from the input question and the closest sentence in
the retrieved documents to the actual answer in the
original dataset. Note that, while we can use the
MS MARCO task for this (as we have access to
long-form conversational responses), we exclude
SQuAD, TriviaQA or NQ from response modeling,
as they all comprise generally short-form answers.
We additionally use the knowledge-grounded dia-
logue tasks (Wizard of Wikipedia and Wizard of
the Internet) as each dialogue response is annotated
with the relevant knowledge used to write it. For
4https://microsoft.github.io/msmarco/PersonaChat, ED and BST we can use the original
response as the target, but we additionally concate-
nate into the context the gold knowledge entity that
was calculated during the knowledge task construc-
tion.
We provide further details, including dataset
sizes, in Appendix C.
3.3 SeeKeR Tasks for Language Modeling
Search Module Tasks We do not have access
to a human-curated dataset of search queries for
language modeling as we do for dialogue, so in
this case we construct a task based on predicting
document titles. Using the Common Crawl dump
(Wenzek et al., 2020), a given input example is
a single web document, which we randomly cut
at an arbitrary point, and only keep the beginning
(in order to model left to right generation). The
target output we want to generate is the title of
the document, which we also heuristically simplify
by removing phrases in parentheses or following a
hyphen in order to make the query terms learned
more generic. We multi-task with another variation
of this task: for a given target sentence, we pre-
dict the title of the document for its corresponding
“knowledge” sentence (discussed in the following
paragraph). Finally, we also multi-task with the
Wizard of Internet search query task as in subsec-
tion 3.2.
Knowledge Module Task To construct our
knowledge task, we also start with Common Crawl,
splitting it into sentences. We construct a Lucene5
search over Common Crawl, and then, for a given
target sentence of a document, we ﬁnd the sentence
most similar to the target that is neither identical
nor in the same document. We skip sentences less
than 5 words or with F1 overlap less than 0.33, simi-
lar to before. During training, we limit to examples
where the knowledge and target continuation have
a shared entity6. We thus construct a task – where
the document containing the retrieved sentenced
is provided in addition to the input document – in
order to mimic a search retrieval setup, with the
target being the retrieved sentence.
Response Module Task The response task is
constructed similarly to the knowledge task, ex-
cept the input is only the usual language modeling
context plus the knowledge sentence (surrounded
5https://lucene.apache.org/
6https://spacy.io/usage/linguistic-features#
named-entities
by special tokens). The target is the next sentence
(tokens).
4 Experiments
Full training details, including ﬁne-tuning hyperpa-
rameters, are provided in Appendix B.
4.1 Open-Domain Dialogue
4.1.1 Automatic Evaluation
We ﬁrst test our models on the Wizard of Inter-
net open-domain knowledge-grounded dialogue
dataset, which was speciﬁcally designed for eval-
uating internet-driven dialogue agents. As well as
measuring perplexity and F1 overlap with gold dia-
logues, one can also measure Knowledge F1 (KF1),
the overlap of the dialogue response with the gold
annotated knowledge sentences used by the human
crowdworker. We can supply the gold documents
to the model in an additional evaluation setting, or
similarly supply the gold knowledge sentence(s)
as well. In the full (non-gold) setup, we evaluate
the use of the Bing search engine to ﬁlter Common
Crawl, as in Komeili et al. (2021).
We compare to the methods reported in Komeili
et al. (2021) in Table 2, as well as the BB2 3B pa-
rameter model (Chen et al., 2021). SeeKeR using
gold documents or knowledge provides the best
performance on all three metrics over all methods,
while using the search engine with SeeKeR pro-
vides lower perplexity than in previously reported
methods. Although F1 is lower, KF1 is correspond-
ingly higher, indicating that there is perhaps some
trade-off here where our model encourages using
more knowledge.
4.1.2 Human Evaluation Setup
Task Setting We perform a human evaluation
using crowdworkers in the same setting as Komeili
et al. (2021). The crowdworker is asked to play
a role from the Wizard of Internet dataset, and to
have a natural conversation. Each conversation
consists of 15 messages (7 from the human, 8 from
the bot). We collect 100 dialogues – roughly 800
annotations – per model.
Evaluation For each turn of their conversation,
we ask the crowdworker to mark their partner’s re-
sponses for conversational attributes, in particular
whether they are: (i) consistent, (ii) knowledge-
able (iii) factually correct; and (iv) engaging (all
of which are yes/no binary questions; see Komeili
et al. (2021) and Figure 8 for full deﬁnitions). Atthe end of the conversation, an additional question
collects an overall engagingness score (a Likert
scale from 1 to 5) for their speaking partner. Un-
fortunately as this is collected per dialogue rather
than per-utterance we found it much more difﬁcult
to get statistical signiﬁcance, with results given in
the appendix. For the per-turn metrics, we average
them over the turns and conversations conducted
for each model. From the knowledgeable and en-
gaging metrics we can additionally calculate (i)
the percent of turns that are both knowledgeable
and engaging and (ii) the percent of knowledgeable
turns that were also engaging, as these can more
inform us how well the models are blending knowl-
edge into an interesting conversation. More details
regarding human evaluation are in Appendix D.
Baselines We compare to the existing publicly
available chatbots BlenderBot 1 (Roller et al., 2021)
and BlenderBot 2 (BB2) (in “search mode”), using
the 3B parameter version in both cases. BlenderBot
1 was already found to be superior to several other
chatbots, in particular Meena (Adiwardana et al.,
2020) and DialoGPT (Zhang et al., 2020), and we
do not evaluate those here.
4.1.3 Human Evaluation Results
The main results are given in Table 1. We ﬁnd
improvements over both BlenderBot 1 and 2 for a
wide variety of metrics: consistency, knowledge,
factual (in)correctness and per-turn engagingess.
For turns that are marked knowledgeable, we also
see an increase in the engagingness of the knowl-
edge itself compared to the baselines by a wide
margin (94.7% vs. 78-79%), while the number
of turns that are marked as both knowledgeable
and engaging (at the same time) has also increased
(44% vs. 21-28%). These improvements are statis-
tically signiﬁcant using an independent two-sample
t-test,p < 0:001.
4.1.4 Ablations
We test various ablations of our model, with de-
tailed results in Appendix Table 8.
Pre-Training First, our pre-training scheme is
different to BlenderBot 1 and 2, with training
based on both language modeling and dialogue
pre-training tasks, as well as slightly different ar-
chitectures. We thus tests variants of BlenderBot
1 and 2 with our pre-training setup, by ﬁne-tuning
on the same tasks as in those works. and denote
these with “R2C2” to differentiate them. We ﬁnd
Factually Per-Turn Knowl. % Knowl.
Model Consistent "Knowl. "Incorrect #Engaging " & Engaging " is Engaging "
BB1 (Roller et al., 2021) 75.47% 36.17% 9.14% 78.72% 28.79% 79.58%
BB2 (Chen et al., 2021) 65.06% 27.88% 4.21% 83.52% 21.93% 78.67%
SeeKeR 78.47% 46.49%3.94% 90.41%44.03%94.71%
Table 1: Comparison of SeeKeR with state-of-the-art models on open-domain dialogue, as judged by human
evaluators during short conversations.indicates statistically signiﬁcant improvements over the next closest model
(independent two-sample t-test,p < 0:001).
Model PPL #F1"KF1 "
Komeili et al. (2021) Results (BART-Large models)
No Search 17.4 17.6 6.8
Search engine 16.1 17.9 7.0
Gold Doc 13.9 20.0 9.6
BlenderBot 2 (3B parameters)
Search engine - 16.1 6.7
Gold Doc - 18.2 10.5
SeeKeR Search engine 15.2 16.7 8.3
SeeKeR Gold Doc 12.7 20.1 12.7
SeeKeR Gold Knowl. Resp. 8.6 24.5 21.6
Table 2: Automatic evaluations of SeeKeR compared
with existing results from Komeili et al. (2021) and
BB2 on the WizInt task (valid set). We do not report
BB2 PPL as it is not comparable (different dictionary).
that the performance of R2C2 BlenderBot 1 re-
mains roughly the same, except that it is marked
as less factually incorrect. R2C2 BlenderBot 2
uses knowledge more, but also loses engagingness
score compared to the original method. SeeKeR
still compares favorably to both methods. This in-
dicates that the language modeling objective may
make using knowledge easier, perhaps because it
emphasizes using the context more than dialogue
tasks do.
Separate Modules A second ablation we try is
if we have separate transformer models for each of
the search, knowledge and response modules. We
therefore experiment using separate BART (Lewis
et al., 2020a) modules for knowledge and search
query generation, which ends up as an inferior
model despite containing nearly 800M more pa-
rameters; we believe this is perhaps because BART
is smaller (400M parameters), and is not as good
at performing the individual modular tasks. We do
not evaluate having three separate 3B parameter
models due to memory constraints.
4.1.5 Analysis
Pairwise Comparison We conducted a further
ACUTE-Eval (Li et al., 2019) human evaluation
where crowdworkers compared chat logs pairwiseand gave reasons why one is preferred over the
other (see Appendix Table 9 for further details).
Summarizing the crowdworkers’ opinions, we ﬁnd
that when SeeKeR is preferred, the reasons are that
it has “more information to share”, is “more knowl-
edgable” and has “more accurate information”. It
was also found to “ﬂow better”, “sticks to the sub-
ject” and is a “more in-depth conversationalist”. It
also “takes conversation in new related directions”,
while other knowledge-based models seemed to
be “like just copying wikipedia” compared to this
model. When SeeKeR was not preferred, crowd-
workers said that it “asks too many questions”, is
“repetitive”, “less engaging” or “less consistent” for
those particular dialogues. Generally, in short con-
versations there seems to be a tradeoff in incorpo-
rating too much knowledge in the conversation at
the expense of what crowdworkers deem as engag-
ingness. We note that other models have addressed
this by deciding when to use knowledge vs. not
(Chen et al., 2021), which would be possible to
incorporate in SeeKeR models as well, and is a
potential direction for future work.
Cherry picked examples We show a cherry
picked conversation between a human crowd-
worker and our SeeKeR model in Figure 2. The
conversation about gaming spans several games,
and aspects of gaming, from mods for certain
games to PC hardware used and where it can be
bought. The model effectively uses internet search
to bring up pertinent information for each of these
topics as can be seen by the internet searches it in-
vokes (in red) and the knowledge sentences gener-
ated from the retrieved documents (in green). More
cherry picked conversations are shown in Appendix
Figure 4, Figure 5 and Figure 6.
Lemon picked examples We show several
lemon picked conversational snippets between a
human crowdworker and our SeeKeR model in Fig-
ure 3 and Appendix Figure 7. We identify four gen-
eral model issues, and provide a few representative
examples of each. Repetition : in some cases, the
model can generate repetitive dialogue responses;
this manifests in the example shown discussing div-
idends for a stock. Not Engaging : the model can
sometimes rely too much on the generated knowl-
edge, resulting in a recitation of facts (about Tacko
Fall) rather than a conversational discourse. Ignore
Partner : although we often see the model change
topics smoothly, at times it will adamantly continue
discussing chess or the Pittsburgh Penguins salary
cap (Figure 7), when its partner is not interested.
Incorrect Knowledge : ﬁnally, when the model is
given incorrect knowledge, the dialogue responses
stray from the truth; this can manifest as a result of
undesired knowledge given an ambiguous search
query (“when was sorry created”, Figure 7), or
even incorrect information from the internet itself
(Wong Kar-wai, according to IMDB7, was born in
1956, whereas Wikipedia8notes it is 1958).
4.2 Prompt Completion
4.2.1 Automatic Evaluations
Task Setting We ﬁrst test with automatic eval-
uations the SeeKeR method compared to vanilla
GPT2 on the RoBERTa task (see subsection 3.1).
To make sure all models are on an equal footing,
we ﬁne-tune them on this task (even though GPT2
pre-training should be quite similar), where we
train with a given document up to a given line as
the “prompt” and the next line in the document as
the continuation. We then measure the metrics of
validation perplexity as well as F1 of the generated
continuations compared to gold. We compare three
sizes of GPT2 with SeeKeR, and for each architec-
ture size two variants of SeeKeR: the “x3” variant
that comprises three independently trained mod-
els (for search, knowledge and response), and the
shared parameter version. The “x3” has more pa-
rameters than standard SeeKeR or GPT2 but can be
used to gauge how difﬁcult it is to perform all three
tasks at once with a single model. The results for
SeeKeR are shown either with the gold document
or by using Lucene search over Common Crawl
(ignoring documents which contain the identical
target match, if found – which also includes the
original input document).
Results The results are given in Table 3. We see
improvements in both perplexity and F1 with in-
creasing size models, with SeeKeR models outper-
forming conventional GPT2 when using Gold Docs,
7https://www.imdb.com/name/nm0939182/bio
8https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wong_Kar-waiand slightly behind when using Lucene search9.
Despite the “x3” SeeKeR models being three times
larger, they are only marginally better than all-in-
one SeeKeR models in terms of perplexity, and the
all-in-one versions even outperform them in terms
of F1 for the largest XL models.
No Doc
Model PPL #F1"PPL #F1"
GPT2 Medium 11.9 14.8 - -
GPT2 Large 10.7 15.4 - -
GPT2 XL 9.7 15.8 - -
Gold Doc Lucene Search
SeeKeR Med. x3 9.9 25.7 12.6 13.2
SeeKeR Medium 10.3 25.7 13.1 13.6
SeeKeR Large x3 8.9 26.3 11.2 13.9
SeeKeR Large 9.2 27.1 12.3 13.4
SeeKeR XL x3 8.4 27.2 10.4 13.7
SeeKeR XL 8.5 28.1 11.3 14.0
Table 3: Comparison of SeeKeR with GPT2 of vari-
ous sizes, measured on Common Crawl (valid set). x3
means using three separate models (for 3x the num-
ber of parameters). Training a single model to perform
search, knowledge and response performs similarly to
separate models, and provides better performance on
the Gold Docs as the models increase in size.
Model Sensible (")
True (")
Hallucination (#)
Topical (")
GPT2 Med. (345M) 81% 15% 68% 1%
GPT2 Large (762M) 81% 18% 71% 0%
GPT2 XL (1.5B) 81% 14% 73% 0%
GPT3 (175B InstructGPT) 82% 58% 62% 4%
SeeKeR Med. (345M) 75% 34% 54% 13%
SeeKeR Large (762M) 68% 36% 51% 8%
SeeKeR XL (1.5B) 77% 43% 58% 15%
SeeKeR XL (Jan ’22) 71% 43% 51% 19%
Table 4: Topical Prompts: Human Evaluation re-
sults comparing SeeKeR with GPT2 (and GPT3).
All models are relatively sensible (with wins for
GPT2/3), but GPT2 contains far less true statements,
and far more false statements (hallucinations), and is
hardly ever on topic. A much smaller SeeKeR model
(345M) can also outperform a much larger GPT2
model (1.5B), and even outperforms 175B (Instruct)
GPT3 on the hallucination and topical metrics, despite
being 500smaller.
4.2.2 Topical Prompts
Task Setting In order to evaluate if our language
models can effectively use internet search to pro-
9This is to be expected as the probability mass is centered
around the knowledge response which may not align with
a single gold label, thus necessitating human evaluation in
addition to automatic evaluations, see Adolphs et al. (2021).
Prompt GPT2 (XL) Completion SeeKeR (XL) completion
In recent developments,
we have learned the fol-
lowing about Ban of Twit-
ter in Nigeria.BanofTwitterisasocialmediaplatform that
allows users tocreateandshare contenton
Twitter.Theplatform waslaunched inNige -
riainMarch 2017.The Minister of Information, Lai Mo-
hammed, has said that the ban on Twitter
will be lifted soon.
In recent developments,
we have learned the
following about Charles
Njonjo.1.Hewasborn inNige ria.2.Heisagraduate
oftheUniversityofLagos.We have learned that Charles was cremated
on January 2, 2022, and that his body was
returned to his family.
In recent developments,
we have learned the fol-
lowing about William M.
Ellinghaus.Elling haus wasborn inNew York City, New
York, onJanuary 1,1891.Ellinghaus was named chairman of the Mu-
nicipal Assistance Corporation, which was
created to contain the crisis, and was later ap-
pointed to the Emergency Financial Control
Board, which took over city ﬁscal affairs.
In recent developments,
we have learned the fol-
lowing about Terry Tea-
chout.Terry Teachout isrunning forCongress in
New York’s 18th Congressional District. She
isaformerstate assemblyman andstate sena-
tor.Terry Teachout is the author of the new book,
The New JimCrow: Mass Incarceration in
theAge ofColorblind ness.
Table 5: Topical prompts: cherry and lemon picked examples comparing SeeKeR with GPT2. In the ﬁrst
two examples GPT2 hallucinates (in yellow), while SeeKeR provides correct topical continuations. In the third
example SeeKeR does not hallucinate, but is not topical with a recent development. In the fourth example both
GPT2 and SeeKeR give poor responses. SeeKeR is correct in that Terry Teachout is an author, but it names a book
by Michelle Alexander, which happens to be on the same web page as a book by Terry Teachout that the search
engine retrieves.
Figure 2: Cherry picked example of a SeeKeR model chatting with a human crowdworker, with the conversation
starting in the upper left. White boxes on the left are the user messages, while we show model search queries in
red boxes, generated knowledge in green boxes, and dialogue responses in blue boxes. Note: the human conversa-
tionalist only saw the ﬁnal responses (blue boxes) from their conversational partner.
Human Repetitive SeeKeR Human Not Engaging SeeKeR
Human Ignore Partner SeeKeR Human Incorrect Knowledge SeeKeR
Figure 3: Lemon picked examples : four types of issues arising in a conversation between a SeeKeR model
chatting with several human crowdworkers. Top left repetitive outputs; top right uninteresting recitation of facts;
bottom left ignoring the conversational partner; bottom right incorrect knowledge used in a response (the model
actually pulls this information from IMDB, which has different (and presumably, incorrect) information from
Wikipedia).
vide up-to-date information, we construct a spe-
ciﬁc set of evaluation prompts. We gather from
Wikipedia a set of current events from January
202210, and extract the entities, ignoring those con-
taining the term “covid” (as there are so many)
as well as countries (as they might be too general
a topic). We use 100 topics, which range from
the Prime Minister of Haiti to the Rio Carnival to
Pﬁzer. We then construct the prompts “In recent
developments we have learned the following about
10https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events/
January_2022<TOPIC>.” and ask the language model to continue
it. We compare SeeKeR using the Mojeek search
engine11to GPT2 of different sizes as before. We
additionally use the GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020)
API (using the “text-davinci-001” 175B Instruct-
GPT model with default parameters) to evaluate
that as well.
Evaluation We perform a human evaluation of
the correctness of the continuation, where the an-
notator has access to internet search for validation
11http://mojeek.com
purposes. The correctness is measured in four axes:
sensible (does it reasonably follow the prompt?),
true(does it contain some true information?), hallu-
cination (does it contain some false information?)
andtopical (does it reference what happened in the
last two months, i.e., January and February 2022?).
Results Results are given in Table 4. We ﬁnd that
our SeeKeR model provides improved metrics over
GPT2 with more true completions (by over 20%),
fewer hallucinations (by around 20%) and more
topicality (by about 15%), whilst sensibleness is
slightly less (e.g., 81% vs. 77%). We ﬁnd these
wins across all model sizes (medium, large and XL)
and in fact a medium size (345M) SeeKeR model
outperforms GPT2 XL (1.5B) by similar margins
as those just mentioned. GPT3, on the other hand,
is a far larger model that has also been ﬁne-tuned
with human judgments (Ouyang et al., 2022) and
outperforms GPT2 and SeeKeR in terms of the
sensible and true metrics, generating ﬂuent text
that can in some cases directly copy portions of the
relevant Wikipedia article. However, like GPT2,
it also introduces a large number of hallucinations
(62%), and fails to be topical (4%). A SeeKeR
345M parameter model, due to its search capability,
outperforms GPT3 on the hallucination and topical
metrics, despite being 500 smaller.
Analysis We show example cherry and lemon
picked examples in Table 5. The ﬁrst two examples
show SeeKeR providing topical correct comple-
tions based on the results from the search engine,
whereas GPT2 hallucinates non-topical yet ﬂuent
looking responses. The third and fourth exam-
ples show failure cases of SeeKeR. Example three
shows a factually correct response from SeeKeR,
which is based on results from the search engine,
but it is not topical. The last (fourth) example
shows a hallucination from SeeKeR where it mixes
up two authors; inspecting the web search results
indicates this is because both authors are mentioned
in the page, and the method mixes them up. We
show some further examples comparing to GPT3
in Appendix Table 6.
Due to the issue of non-topical results from web
search, we also tried a version of SeeKeR where
we appended “January 2022” to the search query to
see if this produced more topical generations. We
do see a reduction in hallucinations and a relative
increase in topicality in this case (up from 15%
to 19%) indicating the search engine part of thesystem is crucial for this task.
4.3 Multi-tasking Dialogue and Language
Modeling
So far we have considered our SeeKeR ﬁne-tuning
tasks of dialogue and language modeling separately,
and have conducted separate experiments in sub-
section 4.1 and subsection 4.2. Here, we also con-
duct some experiments to evaluate if we can build
a single SeeKeR model that can perform well at
both ﬁne-tuned dialogue and language modeling
tasks all at once. To do this, we begin with the
transformer architecture described in subsection 3.1
which has been pre-trained on both dialogue and
language modeling tasks (denoted R2C2). We then
ﬁne-tune it on both types of tasks as well.
Topical Prompts Results in Appendix Table 7
compare this model to GPT2 and GPT3, as well
as GPT2-based SeeKeR language models on the
topical prompts task using human evaluations. The
results show that the fully multi-tasked SeeKeR
model performs very well, superior to all our GPT2-
based SeeKeR models on every metric (sensible,
true, hallucination and topical), with the lowest
hallucination score of 42% that compares very fa-
vorably to that of GPT3 (62%). The sensible score
was a bit lower for the GPT2 SeeKeR models previ-
ously compared to standard GPT2, but this is now
closer, at 80% (with GPT3 at 82%). Fine-tuning
this SeeKeR R2C2 architecture only on language
modeling (and not dialogue ﬁne-tune tasks) also
works well.
Open-Domain Dialogue Results in Appendix
Table 10 and Table 8 compare this model using
automated metrics and human evaluations, respec-
tively, on our open-domain knowledge-grounded
dialogue task. The model performs comparably, if
not better, in all automated metrics on the task. In
human evaluations, results suffer compared to the
dialogue ﬁne-tuned only model, with most metrics
being lower (e.g., percent of knowledge that is en-
gaging dropped from 95% to 75%), except for fac-
tually incorrect and the ﬁnal rating (which was not
a statistically signiﬁcant result). Thus, developing
a strongly-performing multi-task system that can
complete both language modeling and ﬁne-tuned
dialogue tasks should still be considered future
work.
5 Limitations & Discussion
Our language models suffer the same issues as
other systems that exist today, speciﬁcally with
problems of occasional inconsistency, contradic-
tions, factual inaccuracies, potential repetition, and
lack of deeper reasoning, amongst other issues
(Roller et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022). Further,
generations can include toxic language and bias, es-
pecially with certain contexts and topics (Xu et al.,
2020; Dinan et al., 2020). Additionally, documents
from the internet inﬂuence our generations, which
can be a problem if undesirable content is retrieved.
In our SeeKeR experiments, we rely on an exter-
nally built search engine, which has both pros and
cons. Modular architectures have the advantage
that engineers can optimize and develop parts of
them separately, and obviously search engines have
been ﬁnely tuned in production settings for many
years. In contrast, if building one’s own retrieval
system, as many QA and LM methods currently
do, one has to essentially start again from scratch.
Search engines are already built to crawl and in-
dex the latest news and documents which requires
signiﬁcant engineering, but can be important for
applications. Methods reported in the literature us-
ing their own retrieval setup typically used a ﬁxed
database of documents, which will hence be out of
date. On the other hand, search engines have been
designed to be used by humans, not machines, so
queries are in natural language, and only consist of
a few words. Machines can potentially do better by
encoding a lot more information from a longer con-
text into either a longer query, or a vector-encoded
query, as is done in e.g. FAISS-based systems
(Lewis et al., 2020b). However, a beneﬁt of search
engine-based queries is that they are human read-
able which provides both interpretability as well as
the potential to improve through direct annotation
or feedback.
6 Conclusion
We have presented a modular system for search-
ing for and choosing knowledge during language
model generation. Our approach outperforms the
state of the art on dialogue modeling, and is shown
to outperform both GPT2 with the same architec-
ture on topical prompts – even when using a smaller
parameter size – and GPT3 – despite being vastly
(500x) smaller. Our approach of explicitly splitting
into three modules allows for engineering better
modules in the future, e.g. ﬁne-tuning parts of themodel, as well as the advantage of interpretability.
We make our code and models publicly available
for further research.
References
Daniel Adiwardana, Minh-Thang Luong, David R. So,
Jamie Hall, Noah Fiedel, Romal Thoppilan, Zi Yang,
Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Gaurav Nemade, Yifeng Lu,
and Quoc V . Le. 2020. Towards a human-like open-
domain chatbot. CoRR , abs/2001.09977.
Leonard Adolphs, Kurt Shuster, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2021. Reason ﬁrst, then
respond: Modular generation for knowledge-infused
dialogue. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05204 .
Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Kee-
gan, Megan Squire, and Jeremy Blackburn. 2020.
The pushshift reddit dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08435 .
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoff-
mann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican,
George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau,
Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al. 2021. Improv-
ing language models by retrieving from trillions of
tokens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04426 .
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing
systems , 33:1877–1901.
Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, Mojtaba Komeili, Spencer
Poff, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Arthur Szlam, Ja-
son Weston, and Jing Xu. 2021. Blender bot 2.0: An
open source chatbot that builds long-term memory
and searches the internet. https://parl.ai/
projects/blenderbot2/ . [Online; accessed
10-March-2022].
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal,
Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco
Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised
cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 8440–
8451, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Nicola De Cao, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. 2021.
Editing factual knowledge in language models. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
6491–6506, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack Ur-
banek, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2020.
Queens are powerful too: Mitigating gender bias in
dialogue generation. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8173–8188, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.Emily Dinan, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Angela
Fan, Michael Auli, and Jason Weston. 2019. Wizard
of wikipedia: Knowledge-powered conversational
agents. In International Conference on Learning
Representations .
Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Nicolas Usunier.
2017. Improving neural language models with a
continuous cache. In 5th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon,
France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Pro-
ceedings . OpenReview.net.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. 2016. Gaussian er-
ror linear units (gelus).
Samuel Humeau, Kurt Shuster, Marie-Anne Lachaux,
and Jason Weston. 2019. Poly-encoders: Architec-
tures and pre-training strategies for fast and accurate
multi-sentence scoring. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations .
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021a. Distilling
knowledge from reader to retriever for question an-
swering. In International Conference on Learning
Representations .
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021b. Lever-
aging passage retrieval with generative models for
open domain question answering. In Proceedings
of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Main Volume , pages 874–880, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehen-
sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551 .
Urvashi Khandelwal, Angela Fan, Dan Jurafsky, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2021. Nearest neigh-
bor machine translation. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations .
Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2020. Generaliza-
tion through memorization: Nearest neighbor lan-
guage models. In 8th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenReview.net.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings .
Mojtaba Komeili, Kurt Shuster, and Jason Weston.
2021. Internet-augmented dialogue generation.
CoRR , abs/2107.07566.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-
ﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti,
Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin,
Kenton Lee, et al. 2019. Natural questions: a bench-
mark for question answering research. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
7:453–466.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Elena Gribovskaya, Wojciech
Stokowiec, and Nikolai Grigorev. 2022. Internet-
augmented language models through few-shot
prompting for open-domain question answering.
Jungseob Lee, Midan Shim, Suhyune Son, Yujin Kim,
Chanjun Park, and Heuiseok Lim. 2022. Empirical
study on blenderbot 2.0 errors analysis in terms of
model, data and user-centric approach.
Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, and Kristina Toutanova.
2019a. Latent retrieval for weakly supervised open
domain question answering. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 6086–6096, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, and Kristina Toutanova.
2019b. Latent retrieval for weakly supervised open
domain question answering. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 6086–6096, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mike Lewis, Shruti Bhosale, Tim Dettmers, Naman
Goyal, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2021. Base layers:
Simplifying training of large, sparse models. In
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
on Machine Learning , volume 139 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research , pages 6265–6274.
PMLR.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2020a. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
training for natural language generation, translation,
and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 7871–7880, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-
rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-
täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020b.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9459–
9474. Curran Associates, Inc.
Margaret Li, Jason Weston, and Stephen Roller. 2019.
Acute-eval: Improved dialogue evaluation with opti-
mized questions and multi-turn comparisons. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.03087 .
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled
weight decay regularization. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations .
Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Samuel Humeau, Martin
Raison, and Antoine Bordes. 2018. Training mil-
lions of personalized dialogue agents. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pages 2775–2779,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Richard Socher. 2017. Pointer sentinel mixture mod-
els. In 5th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April
24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings . Open-
Review.net.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea
Finn, and Christopher D Manning. 2022. Fast model
editing at scale. In International Conference on
Learning Representations .
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu,
Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse,
Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders,
et al. 2021. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-
answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.09332 .
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao,
Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and Li Deng.
2016. Ms marco: A human generated machine read-
ing comprehension dataset. In CoCo@ NIPS .
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-
roll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
2022. Training language models to follow instruc-
tions with human feedback. Preprint .
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Lan-
guage models are unsupervised multitask learners.
OpenAI blog , 1(8):9.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions
for machine comprehension of text. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05250 .
Hannah Rashkin, Eric Michael Smith, Margaret Li, and
Y-Lan Boureau. 2019. Towards empathetic open-
domain conversation models: A new benchmark and
dataset. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 5370–5381, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Naman Goyal, Da Ju,
Mary Williamson, Yinhan Liu, Jing Xu, Myle Ott,
Eric Michael Smith, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason We-
ston. 2021. Recipes for building an open-domain
chatbot. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Main Volume , pages 300–325,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kurt Shuster, Da Ju, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Y-
Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2020. The di-
alogue dodecathlon: Open-domain knowledge and
image grounded conversational agents. In Proceed-
ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , pages 2453–2470,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela,
and Jason Weston. 2021. Retrieval augmentation re-
duces hallucination in conversation. Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2021 .
Eric Smith, Mary Williamson, Kurt Shuster, Jason We-
ston, and Y-Lan Boureau. 2020. Can you put it all
together: Evaluating conversational agents’ ability
to blend skills. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics . ACL.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall,
Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du,
et al. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog
applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239 .
Jack Urbanek, Angela Fan, Siddharth Karamcheti,
Saachi Jain, Samuel Humeau, Emily Dinan, Tim
Rocktäschel, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, and Ja-
son Weston. 2019. Learning to speak and act in
a fantasy text adventure game. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 673–683, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Con-
neau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzmán, Ar-
mand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2020. CCNet:
Extracting high quality monolingual datasets from
web crawl data. In Proceedings of the 12th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages
4003–4012, Marseille, France. European Language
Resources Association.
Jing Xu, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Y-Lan Boureau, Ja-
son Weston, and Emily Dinan. 2020. Recipes for
safety in open-domain chatbots. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.07079 .
Jing Xu, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2021. Be-
yond goldﬁsh memory: Long-term open-domain
conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07567 .Yinfei Yang, Steve Yuan, Daniel Cer, Sheng-yi Kong,
Noah Constant, Petr Pilar, Heming Ge, Yun-Hsuan
Sung, Brian Strope, and Ray Kurzweil. 2018. Learn-
ing semantic textual similarity from conversations.
InProceedings of The Third Workshop on Repre-
sentation Learning for NLP , pages 164–174, Mel-
bourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Dani Yogatama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, and
Lingpeng Kong. 2021. Adaptive Semiparametric
Language Models. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 9:362–373.
Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Per-
sonalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you
have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 2204–2213. ACL.
Yizhe Zhang, Siqi Sun, Michel Galley, Yen-Chun Chen,
Chris Brockett, Xiang Gao, Jianfeng Gao, Jingjing
Liu, and Bill Dolan. 2020. Dialogpt: Large-scale
generative pre-training for conversational response
generation. In ACL, system demonstration .
Pei Zhou, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Behnam Hedayat-
nia, Seokhwan Kim, Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren, Yang
Liu, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2021. Think before
you speak: Using self-talk to generate implicit com-
monsense knowledge for response generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.08501 .
A Appendix: Additional Examples and Evaluations
Prompt GPT3 (text-davinci-001) Completion SeeKeR (XL) completion
In recent developments,
we have learned the fol-
lowing about Kay-Achim
Schönbach.First, heisthesonofawealthy industrialist.
Second, heisagraduateoftheUniversityof
Heidelberg, where hestudiedlaw.Third, he
isamem berofthebarinboth Heidelberg
andBerlin.The head of Germany’s navy, Vice Admi-
ral Kay-Achim Schoenbach, has stepped
down from his post after making controver-
sial statements regarding the delicate security
situation on the border between Russia and
Ukraine.
In recent developments,
we have learned the fol-
lowing about Ban of Twit-
ter in Nigeria.1. Twitter is still unavailable in Nigeria as at
the time of this report. 2.There isnoupdate
onwhen thebanwillbelifted.The Minister of Information, Lai Mo-
hammed, has said that the ban on Twitter
will be lifted soon.
In recent developments,
we have learned the
following about Charles
Njonjo.Charles Njonjo was born in Kenya -in1927. -
Hewaseducated attheUniversityofLondon,
andwascalled tothebarin1954.We have learned that Charles was cremated
on January 2, 2022, and that his body was
returned to his family.
In recent developments,
we have learned the fol-
lowing about William M.
Ellinghaus.HeisagraduateoftheUniversityofNotre
Dame, where hestudiedbusiness administra-
tion. Heisthefounder andCEO ofElling -
haus Corp., acompany thatprovides consult-
ingandﬁnancialservices totheenergy indus-
try.Ellinghaus was named chairman of the Mu-
nicipal Assistance Corporation, which was
created to contain the crisis, and was later ap-
pointed to the Emergency Financial Control
Board, which took over city ﬁscal affairs.
In recent developments,
we have learned the fol-
lowing about Terry Tea-
chout.1) He is a well-known theatre critic and au-
thor.
2) His work has appeared in The New York
Times, The Wall Street Journal, and The
Weekly Standard, among other publications.Terry Teachout is the author of the new book,
The New JimCrow: Mass Incarceration in
theAge ofColorblind ness.
Table 6: Topical prompts: cherry and lemon picked examples comparing SeeKeR with GPT3. In the ﬁrst four
examples GPT3 hallucinates (in yellow), while SeeKeR presents correct topical continuations. In the second to
last example SeeKeR does not hallucinate, but is not topical with a recent development. In the last example, GPT3
does not hallucinate, but does not provide a topical completion, while SeeKeR is correct in that Terry Teachout is
an author, but it names a book by Michelle Alexander, which happens to be on the same web page as a book by
Terry Teachout that the search engine retrieves.
Model Sensible (")
True (")
Hallucination (#)
Topical (")
GPT2 Med. (345M) 81% 15% 68% 1%
GPT2 Large (762M) 81% 18% 71% 0%
GPT2 XL (1.5B) 81% 14% 73% 0%
GPT3 (175B InstructGPT) 82% 58% 62% 4%
SeeKeR GPT2 Med. (345M) 75% 34% 54% 13%
SeeKeR GPT2 Large (762M) 68% 36% 51% 8%
SeeKeR GPT2 XL (1.5B) 77% 43% 58% 15%
SeeKeR GPT2 XL (Jan ’22) 71% 43% 51% 19%
SeeKeR R2C2 LM only (3B) 77% 46% 47% 16%
SeeKeR R2C2 (3B) 80% 55% 42% 19%
Table 7: Topical Prompts: Human Evaluation results comparing multi-tasking SeeKeR with various models.
In the main paper we test SeeKeR with a GPT2 pre-trained base to be comparable to GPT2. Here, we additionally
use the R2C2 transformer architecture pre-trained with our LM+Dialogue tasks (subsection 3.1). We test two
versions: SeeKeR R2C2 which is ﬁne-tuned on both the dialogue and LM tasks of subsection 3.2 and subsection 3.3
and SeeKeR R2C2 LM only, which is ﬁne-tuned only using subsection 3.3. The fully multi-tasked RC2C SeeKeR
(Dialogue+LM) performs well compared to other models.
Factually Per-Turn Knowl. % Knowl.
Model Consistent Knowl. Incorrect Engaging & Engaging is Engaging Rating
BB1 75.47% 36.17% 9.14% 78.72% 28.79% 79.58% 4.1
BB2 65.06% 27.88% 4.21% 83.52% 21.93% 78.67% 4.4
BB1 (R2C2) 73.44% 36.25% 4.84% 79.22% 27.51% 75.90% 4.2
BB2 (R2C2) 71.91% 67.92% 4.49% 76.03% 53.18% 78.31% 4.2
SeeKeR (sep. BART modules) 55.39% 41.88% 3.97% 75.09% 28.00% 66.86% 4.4
SeeKeR 78.47% 46.49% 3.94% 90.41% 44.03% 94.71% 4.2
SeeKeR Dialogue+LM 70.87% 43.00% 2.90% 84.36% 32.28% 75.07% 4.5
Table 8: Detailed results and ablations for the open-domain knowledge-grounded dialogue experiments. Human
crowdworkers talk to models and rate them using various metrics. We test standard BlenderBot (BB) 1 and 2, and
R2C2 variants with our Dialogue+LM pre-train tasks (subsection 3.1). We test standard SeeKeR (ﬁne-tuned for
dialogue), SeeKeR with independent BART modules for search queries and knowledge generation, and a version
of SeeKeR (Dialogue+LM) ﬁne-tuned on both the dialogue and LM tasks of subsection 3.2 and subsection 3.3.
Wins % matches (Engagingness)
SeeKeR BB2 BB2 SeeKeR BB1 BB1
sep. BART (R2C2) (R2C2)Loses %SeeKeR sep. BART 62 46 43 58 61
BB2 (R2C2) 38 61 56 58 59
BB2 54 39 52 51 56
SeeKeR 57 44 48 57 61
BB1 42 42 49 43 51
BB1 (R2C2) 39 41 44 39 49
Wins % matches (Knowledgeable)
BB2 BB1 BB1 SeeKeR BB2 SeeKeR
our PT sep. BART our PTLoses %BB2 52 56 57 55 67
BB1 our PT 48 52 57 54 67
BB1 44 48 55 60 48
SeeKeR sep. BART 43 43 45 6446
BB2 our PT 45 46 40 3657
SeeKeR 333352 54 43
Table 9: Human evaluation results on Engagingess (top) and Knowledgeable (bottom) ratings for dialogue models
using ACUTE-Eval (Li et al., 2019).indicates signiﬁcance ( p < : 05),indicates signiﬁcance ( p < 0:01). We
collected an average of 70 ratings per model pair. Results for engagingness are not signiﬁcant, whereas some of
the knowledgeable results are; SeeKeR is found to be more knowledgeable than several other models: BB2, and
BB1 with our pre-training (R2C2).
Search Gold Doc
Model PPL #F1"KF1 " PPL #F1"KF1 "
R2C2 SeeKeR Dialogue FT only 15.2 16.7 8.3 12.7 20.1 12.7
R2C2 SeeKeR Dialogue+LM FT 15.5 16.4 8.4 12.4 20.3 13.2
Table 10: Automatic evaluations of multi-tasked SeeKeR compared with dialogue-tuned SeeKeR on the WizInt
task (valid set).
B Model Details
B.1 SeeKeR 2.7B R2C2 Model Architecture
The SeeKeR model used for dialogue has 22 encoder layers and 22 decoder layers, with an embedding
dimension of 2048, hidden size of 8192, 32 attention heads, pre-layernorms, and GeLU activations
(Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2016). We train with 1024 positional embeddings, allowing for context up to
1024 tokens (for which we use the same dictionary as the GPT2 models).
Figure 4: Cherry picked example of a SeeKeR model chatting with a human crowdworker. White boxes on the left
are the user messages, while we show model search queries in red boxes, generated knowledge in green boxes, and
dialogue responses in blue boxes. Note that the human conversationalist only saw the ﬁnal responses (blue boxes)
from their conversational partner.
B.2 SeeKeR 2.7B R2C2 Pre-training Hyperparameters
The SeeKeR model was pre-trained using a BART denoising objective (Lewis et al., 2020a) with the
default noise hyperparameters. The model was trained for 500,000 total steps. The maximum learning
rate was set to 7e 4with a linear warmup of 15,000 steps and a linear decay to 0. We clipped gradient
norms at 1.0, set dropout to 0.1, and a weight decay of 0.01, and otherwise used the same hyperparameters
as BART Large. The model was pre-trained on 128 V100 GPUs for approximately 25 days.
B.3 SeeKeR 2.7B R2C2 Fine-tuning Hyperparameters
The SeeKeR 2.7B R2C2 model was ﬁne-tuned on all of the search, knowledge, and dialogue response
tasks simultaneously, with training occurring on 64 V100 GPUs for around 20 hours. We used the Adam
optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with weight decay (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019), with a linear warmup
of 100 steps to a maximum learning rate of 1e 6. We used early stopping on performance on a subset of
the training tasks.
B.4 SeeKeR Medium, Large, XL (GPT2) Fine-tuning Hyperparameters
The SeeKeR language models were ﬁne-tuned on all of the search, knowledge, and response tasks
simultaneously, with training occurring on 32 V100 GPUs for around 17, 21, and 31 hours for the XL,
Large, and Medium models, respectively. We used the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with a
linear warmup of 500 steps to a maxiumum learning rate of 7e 6. As above, we used early stopping on
performance of the training tasks.
Figure 5: Cherry picked example of a SeeKeR model chatting with a human crowdworker. White boxes on the
left are the user messages, while we show model search queries in red boxes, generated knowledge in green boxes,
and dialogue responses in blue boxes. Note: the human conversationalist only saw the ﬁnal responses (blue boxes)
from their conversational partner.
B.5 Decoding Hyperparameters
Search Module For all experiments, we use greedy decoding for generating a search query, with a
minimum generation length of two tokens.
Knowledge Module For all experiments, we use beam search decoding with a beam size of 3 for
generating a knowledge response. We enforce a minimum beam length of 10 tokens, and implement
beam n-gram blocking, n= 3, on both the generated response as well as the context. For the knowledge
response module, we not only block on the dialogue context, but also on the generated knowledge
responses, to ensure that knowledge is not repeated (at least verbatim) across a conversation.
Response Module When computing automated generation metrics on the WizInt task (Table 2, Ta-
ble 10), and for all human evaluation experiments (open-domain knowledge-grounded conversation and
topical prompt completion, Table 1, Table 4, Table 8), we use standard beam search with a beam size of
10. We enforce a minimum beam length of 20 tokens, and implement beam n-gram blocking, n= 3, on
both the generated response as well as the context. When computing automated generation metrics on the
prompt completion task (Table 3), we use greedy decoding.
C Data Details
C.1 Pre-training
Our Base model was trained on the concatenation of three existing datasets: RoBERTa, CC100EN, and
Pushshift.io Reddit.
Figure 6: Cherry picked example of a SeeKeR model chatting with a human crowdworker. White boxes on the
left are the user messages, while we show model search queries in red boxes, generated knowledge in green boxes,
and dialogue responses in blue boxes. Note: the human conversationalist only saw the ﬁnal responses (blue boxes)
from their conversational partner.
Human Ignore Partner SeeKeR Human Incorrect Knowledge SeeKeR
Figure 7: Further Lemon picked examples : We show further examples of ignoring partner and incorrect knowl-
edge.
RoBERTa+cc100en Data We use the same data used to train (Lewis et al., 2021), which consists of
approximately 100B tokens, combining corpora used in RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) with the English
subset of the CC100 corpus (Conneau et al., 2020). The GPT2 dictionary, of size 51200, is used for
tokenization. Following (Lewis et al., 2020a), we perform denoising at the sentence level.
Pushshift.io Reddit We use a variant of Reddit discussions, which has also been used in several existing
studies (see e.g. Yang et al. (2018); Mazaré et al. (2018); Shuster et al. (2020)). As discussions are a
tree-like structure and contain context spanning multiple turns, we ﬂatten the dataset by concatenating all
comments from each node in the tree to the root, resulting in one conversation-per-node. We then perform
denoising at the conversation level.
C.2 Fine-tuning
In Table 11, we outline all of the datasets used for ﬁne-tuning, with the number of training examples for
each task. We note that in some cases numbers may differ from the original size of the dataset, as we
performed some ﬁltering to ensure high quality data. E.g., for the knowledge-grounded dialogue tasks, we
only considered cases where the human grounded their response on knowledge; for the search query task,
we only use the ﬁnal search query entered by the human.
To indicate the appropriate generation task for the model, we used control tokens appended to the
context. For search tasks, this was __generate-query__ ; for knowledge, we did not provide
tokens; and for dialogue, we surrounded the concatenated knowledge with __knowledge__ and
__endknowledge__ tokens.
Dataset Number Training Examples
Search Knowledge Response
Knowledge-Grounded Dialogue
Wizard of the Internet (Komeili et al., 2021) 35137 22487 22487
Wizard of Wikipedia (Dinan et al., 2019) - 77310 77310
Open-Domain Dialogue
PersonaChat (Zhang et al., 2018) - 55701 55701
Empathetic Dialogues (Rashkin et al., 2019) - 4393 4393
Blended Skill Talk (Smith et al., 2020) - 9826 9826
Multi-Session Chat (Xu et al., 2021) - 74676 74676
Multi-Session Chat (F1 overlap) - 54121 54121
Question Answering
MS MARCO (Nguyen et al., 2016) - 281658 281658
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) - 87599 -
TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) - 474866 -
Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) - 307373 -
Natural Questions (Open) (Lee et al., 2019b) - 79168 -
Natural Questions (Open Dialogues) (Adolphs et al., 2021) - 11426 -
Language Modeling
Common Crawl (Wenzek et al., 2020) (subset) 1572997 1572997 1572997
Total 1608134 3073601 2153169
Table 11: Details of all the training datasets used.
D Human Evaluation Details
In Figure 8, we display the instructions provided to crowdworkers when chatting with, and annotating the
responses of, the models. In Figure 9, we show what the annotation screen looks like at the beginning of a
conversation.
Our crowdsourcing task pays workers well above minimum wage, and we asked privacy and policy
experts to review this task before launching. The task does not request any personal information from
workers.
Figure 8: Instructions provided to crowdworkers for the turn annotation task.
Figure 9: The annotation pane of the turn annotation task.