Title: Recipes for building an open-domain chatbot

Recipes for building an open-domain chatbot
Stephen Roller Emily Dinan Naman Goyal Da Ju
Mary Williamson Yinhan LiuJing Xu Myle Ott
Kurt Shuster Eric M. Smith Y-Lan Boureau Jason Weston
Facebook AI Research
Abstract
Building open-domain chatbots is a challeng-
ing area for machine learning research. While
prior work has shown that scaling neural mod-
els in the number of parameters and the size
of the data they are trained on gives improved
results, we show that other ingredients are im-
portant for a high-performing chatbot. Good
conversation requires a number of skills that an
expert conversationalist blends in a seamless
way: providing engaging talking points and lis-
tening to their partners, and displaying knowl-
edge, empathy and personality appropriately,
while maintaining a consistent persona. We
show that large scale models can learn these
skills when given appropriate training data and
choice of generation strategy. We build vari-
ants of these recipes with 90M, 2.7B and 9.4B
parameter models, and make our models and
code publicly available. Human evaluations
show our best models are superior to existing
approaches in multi-turn dialogue in terms of
engagingness and humanness measurements.
We then discuss the limitations of this work by
analyzing failure cases of our models.
1 Introduction
In this work, we provide recipes for building open-
domain chatbots that perform well in human evalu-
ations. It has been shown across the ﬁeld of NLP
(Devlin et al., 2019) and in conversational agents
in particular (Dinan et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019;
Adiwardana et al., 2020) that pre-training on large
corpora is important. Beyond simply scaling mod-
els the two main takeaways from our study are:
1. Blending Skills
Large improvements can be made by ﬁne-
tuning on data that emphasizes desirable con-
versational skills. We select tasks that make
Work done while at Facebook; currently AI2 Incubator.Human Generative BST 9.4B
If you could have dinner with one person, dead or alive, who would
that be?
That's a tough one. I think I'd have to go with Steve Jobs. I'd love to
pick his brain.
Ah, interesting choice. What do you know about Steve Jobs?
He was one of the most inﬂuential people in the history of
technology. He was a visionary.
What questions would you ask him?
I'd want to know how he came up with the idea for the iPod. It was
so revolutionary at the time.
Totally...the iPod changed the way everyone listens to music.
It really did. It's crazy to think that it was released in 2001. That was
a long time ago.
Omg wow, that makes me feel old!
I know, right? Time ﬂies by so fast. I wish I could go back to those
simpler times.
Me too, friend, me too. Speaking of music, what's your favorite
album to listen to lately?
I've been listening to a lot of Led Zeppelin lately. They're my favorite
band.
Figure 1: Paper author (left) conversing with our 9.4B
parameter model (right). This example was cherry
picked. We release conversation logs with crowdwork-
ers with our code, along with lemon-picked examples
in Sec. 10.5.
the model focus on personality and engag-
ingness, knowledge, and empathy, achieving
large gains by using the recently introduced
Blended Skill Talk (BST) set-up (Smith et al.,
2020), which targets those aspects by provid-
ing training data and initial conversational
context (personas and topics). Small mod-
els using BST can match or outperform larger
models that do not. While BST emphasizes
desirable traits, we also show this tuning can
minimize undesirable traits learnt from large
corpora, such as toxicity.
2. Generation Strategies
The choice of decoding algorithm is of critical
importance, and two models with the samearXiv:2004.13637v2  [cs.CL]  30 Apr 2020
perplexity but different decoding algorithms
can give vastly different results. In particular
we show that the length of the bot’s utterances
are crucial to human judgments of quality –
too short and the responses are seen as dull or
showing a lack of interest, too long and the
bot appears to wafﬂe and not listen. We show,
contrary to previous work which reports that
beam search is inferior to sampling (Holtzman
et al., 2019; Adiwardana et al., 2020), that
careful choice of search hyperparameters can
give strong results by controlling trade-offs.
In particular, constraining the minimum beam
length gives a crucial control of the dull versus
spicy spectrum of responses.
Human evaluation results are highly dependent
on the precise set-up one chooses. Model perfor-
mance can be strongly affected by the speciﬁc in-
structions given to evaluators, such as a given topic
or not, the overall conversation length, and the
choice of human interlocutors, which may be difﬁ-
cult to jointly account for. We report performance
when employing crowdworkers in short multi-turn
conversations with no prompt. However, in ad-
dition to that, we believe releasing models is the
most reliable way to enable full insight into their
capabilities. We thus make publicly available our
large-scale, state of the art open-domain conver-
sational agent, including code to ﬁne-tune it, the
model weights, and code to evaluate it, so that our
setup is reproducible. In human evaluations of
engagingness our best model outperforms Meena
(Adiwardana et al., 2020) in a pairwise comparison
75% to 25%, and in terms of humanness by 65%
to 35% (both statistically signiﬁcant, two-tailed
binomial test, p<0:01).
While the performance of our bot at ﬁrst sight
is very good, we do not believe we are yet close
to solving the problem of open-domain conversa-
tion. We thus discuss limitations of our models,
and initial attempts to solve them. In particular,
our models still display: a lack of in-depth knowl-
edge if sufﬁciently interrogated; a tendency to stick
to simpler language; and a tendency to repeat oft-
used phrases. We show how unlikelihood training
and retrieve-and-reﬁne mechanisms are potential
avenues for ﬁxing these problems; however, our
initial experiments with these methods are incon-
clusive. We thus discuss future possibilities for
alleviating these problems as well as methods to
clearly expose and evaluate them.
Figure 2: The Poly-encoder Transformer architecture
(Humeau et al., 2019) for retrieval encodes global
features of the context using multiple representations
(codes), which are attended to by each possible can-
didate response. This ﬁnal attention mechanism gives
improved performance over a single global vector rep-
resentation, whilst being tractable to compute.
2 Model architectures
We consider three types of architectures in this
work: retrieval, generative, and retrieve-and-reﬁne
models. All three use Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) as a base.
2.1 Retriever
Given a dialogue history (context) as input, re-
trieval systems select the next dialogue utterance
by scoring a large set of candidate responses and
outputting the highest scoring one. Typically, all
possible training set responses are used as the can-
didate set.
We employ the poly-encoder architecture of
(Humeau et al., 2019). Poly-encoders encode
global features of the context using multiple rep-
resentations ( ncodes, where nis a hyperparame-
ter), which are attended to by each possible can-
didate response, see Figure 2. This ﬁnal attention
mechanism gives improved performance over a
single global vector representation (so-called “bi-
encoders”), whilst still being tractable to compute
compared to simply concatenating input and out-
put as input to a Transformer (so-called “cross-
encoders”). The poly-encoder has state of the
art performance on a number of dialogue tasks
when compared to other retrieval models, and also
gives comparable performance to the winning gen-
erative models on the ConvAI2 competition task
(Zhang et al., 2018) in terms of human evaluation
(Li et al., 2019b). We consider two poly-encoder
sizes: 256M (from (Smith et al., 2020)) and 622M
parameter models which we trained here, both us-
ingN= 64 codes.
2.2 Generator
We employ a standard Seq2Seq Transformer archi-
tecture to generate responses rather than retrieve
them from a ﬁxed set. Our implementation is based
on the ParlAI version (Miller et al., 2017). We use
Byte-Level BPE tokenization (Radford et al., 2019)
trained on the pre-training data, as implemented in
HuggingFace’s Tokenizers.1
We consider three sizes of model: 90M parame-
ters (following Shuster et al., 2019), 2.7B param-
eters and 9.4B parameters. Our 9.4B parameter
model has a 4 layer encoder, a 32 layer decoder
with 4096 dimensional embeddings, and 32 atten-
tion heads. Our 2.7B parameter model roughly
mimics the architectural choices of Adiwardana
et al. (2020), with 2 encoder layers, 24 decoder
layers, 2560 dimensional embeddings, and 32 at-
tention heads.
2.3 Retrieve and Reﬁne
Current generative models are known to have issues
with producing dull and repetitive responses which
are improved, but not resolved, by simply scaling
(Holtzman et al., 2019; Welleck et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2019a). Additionally, generative models are
known to hallucinate knowledge, and in general are
unable to read and access external knowledge other
than what is embedded in their model parameters,
which may be imperfect. One approach to try to
alleviate these problems is to combine a retrieval
step before generation, referred to as a retrieve and
reﬁne model (Weston et al., 2018). We consider
two variants for the retrieval step: dialogue retrieval
and knowledge retrieval.
Dialogue Retrieval We can simply use a
retrieval-based dialogue model in the retrieval step,
as in Sec. 2.1. Given the dialogue history, the re-
trieval model is ﬁrst used to produce a response.
Rather than showing this response to the speak-
ing partner it is appended to the input sequence of
the generator, along with a special separator token.
The generator then outputs a response as normal
given this modiﬁed input sequence. Retrieval mod-
els produce human written utterances which tend
to include more vibrant language than the most
high probability utterances of a standard generative
model. Hence, if the generative model learns when
to copy the elements of such an utterance, and when
not to, it can provide improved responses. To build
1https://github.com/huggingface/
tokenizerssuch models, we use the architectures considered in
the previous two sections for the two components
of the model.
Knowledge Retrieval We can also use the same
mechanism to ﬁrst retrieve from a large knowledge
base, instead of retrieving an initial dialogue ut-
terance. We can then condition the generation on
the retrieved knowledge, as done in models pro-
posed for the Wizard of Wikipedia task (Dinan
et al., 2019c). We hence refer to this as a Wizard
Generative model, as the supervised training sig-
nal of how to use knowledge in dialogue comes
from the Wizard of Wikipedia task, even though
we multi-task on other tasks as well. We use the
same retrieval system as in that cited work, which
uses a TF-IDF-based inverted index lookup over
a Wikipedia dump2to produce an initial set of
knowledge candidates. A Transformer retriever
model (the same as Sec. 2.1) is then used to rank
the candidates and select a single sentence which
is used to condition generation. We additionally
trained a Transformer-based classiﬁer to choose
when to perform retrieval or not on a per-turn basis,
as some contexts do not require knowledge. This
was trained as a two-class classiﬁer discriminating
between contexts that require knowledge or not in
our ﬁne-tuning tasks, to be described in the next
section. We note all other models in this work do
not condition on retrieved knowledge.
3 Training Objectives
3.1 Ranking for Retrieval
To train the retrieval models, a cross-entropy
loss is minimized in which the logits are
ycand 1;:::;y cand n, whereycand 1is the score of
the correct response and the others are sampled
negatives. Following Humeau et al. (2019), during
training we use the other responses in the batch for
negatives. This allows for much faster training, as
we can reuse the embeddings computed for each
candidate, and also use a larger batch size. In our
training we are able to use batches of 512 elements.
3.2 Likelihood Training for Generation
To train the generative models, we use the standard
Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) approach.
2https://parl.ai/projects/wizard_of_
wikipedia/
Given a datasetD=f(x(i);y(i))g, minimize:
L(i)
MLE(p;x(i);y(i)) = jy(i)jX
t=1logp(y(i)
tjx(i);y(i)
<t);
where x(i)is a gold input context and y(i)is a gold
next-utterance, and y(i)
tis thet-th token of y(i).
3.3-blending for Retrieve and Reﬁne
For retrieve and reﬁne, simply appending dialogue
retrieval responses to the context of a generative
model and training with MLE unfortunately does
not yield satisfying results. As the correspondence
between gold label and retrieved utterance is not
necessarily clear, a trained model often opts to sim-
ply ignore the retrieval utterance, as was shown in
Weston et al. (2018). To ensure it is used, one can
replace the retrieved response instead with the gold
response% of the time, treating as a hyperpa-
rameter to be tuned. This gives a smooth transition
between retrieval and generator-only systems. For
knowledge retrieval we ﬁnd this issue to be less
of a problem as the ﬁne-tuning datasets used have
a clear correspondence between gold knowledge
conditioning and response, and in that case we only
use the gold knowledge during training.
3.4 Unlikelihood training for generation
An alternative method to combat the failures in
model generations is to change the loss function.
The unlikelihood loss (Welleck et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2019a) has been shown to help ﬁx mismatches be-
tween human and model distributions across vari-
ous axes, including decreasing repetitions and miti-
gating the issue of overrepresented vocabulary to-
kens.
The unlikelihood loss penalizes a set of tokens
Ctat each time-step, L(i)
UL(p;C1:T;x;y) =
 jyjX
t=1X
yc2Ctlog (1 p(ycjx;y<t));
whereCtV is a subset of the vocabulary. The
overall objective in unlikelihood training then con-
sists of mixing the likelihood and unlikelihood
losses,
L(i)
ULE=L(i)
MLE+L(i)
UL; (1)
where2Ris the mixing hyper-parameter.
Likelihood tries to model the overall sequence
probability distribution, while unlikelihood cor-
rects for known biases. It does this via the setofnegative candidates Ctcalculated at each step t;
typically one speciﬁes in advance a method for
generating such candidates, for example the tokens
which have been repeated or overrepresented. Like-
lihood pushes upthe probability of a gold token
y(i)
twhile unlikelihood pushes down the probability
of negative candidate tokens yc2Ct. In this work
during training we keep a running count of the dis-
tribution of n-grams that appear when generating
from the model, and choose tokens as negative can-
didates from these n-grams when their counts are
above the human distribution counts as measured
from the gold responses.
4 Decoding
For generative models, at inference time, one must
choose a decoding method to generate a response
to the dialogue context given as input. In this work
we compare a number of well-known approaches.
4.1 Beam Search
Two widely used deterministic decoding ap-
proaches are greedy search and beam search. The
former can be seen as a special case of the latter.
Greedy search selects the highest probability to-
ken at each time step: yt= arg maxp(ytjx;y<t).
Beam search maintains a ﬁxed-size set of partially-
decoded sequences, called hypotheses. At each
time step, beam search forms new hypotheses by
appending each token in the vocabulary to each ex-
isting hypothesis, scoring the resulting sequences
then selecting the highest scoring sequences.
We compare beam search for different beam
sizes in our experiments.
4.2 Sampling
An alternative is to sample from a model-dependent
distribution at each step, ytq(ytjx;y<t;p). In
order to prevent sampling low probability tokens,
a typical approach is to restrict sampling to a sub-
set of the vocabulary at each step, and sampling
according to those (renormalized) probabilities.
For sampling methods, we will compare top- k
sampling (Fan et al., 2018) and sample-and-rank
(Adiwardana et al., 2020). The latter performs
samplingStimes, and selects the generated sample
with the highest probability.
4.3 Response Length
Generating with a beam tends to produce short
generations that do not match the length statistics of
the human utterances they were trained on (Weston
et al., 2018). However, longer responses, if of high
quality, can be more engaging than very short ones.
While following the human distribution may not
give optimal performance for a bot – for example, it
may want to err on the side of brevity for improved
human evaluation, because that is less likely to
expose its failings – making its responses longer
may make them provide more information, and
make them less dull.
We consider two simple methods to control the
length of a model’s responses.
Minimum length The ﬁrst method we consider
is a hard constraint on the minimum generation
length: the end token is forced to not be generated
until a minimum sequence length is achieved.
Predictive length The second approach is to pre-
dict the length based on human-human conversa-
tion data. To do this we train a 4-class classiﬁer by
binning the lengths of the next conversation turn
(e.g.,<10,<20,<30, or>30 tokens). We use
the same architecture as the retrieval model for
this classiﬁer. Then, at test time, the classiﬁer is
ﬁrst used to predict the length of the next response,
and sets the minimum generation length constraint
to its corresponding prediction. Unlike the previ-
ous approach, this results in more natural variable
length conversation turns, whilst ensuring long re-
sponses when they seem natural. One drawback,
however, is that this procedure makes our system
more complex.
4.4 Subsequence Blocking
Sequence generation models are known to repeat
subsequences (Holtzman et al., 2018), particularly
in stochastic methods such as beam search, but also
in sampling methods as well (Adiwardana et al.,
2020). We implement standard beam blocking of
n-grams (Paulus et al., 2017) and use n= 3. We
consider both blocking repeated n-grams within
the generated utterance, and repeating of the input
sequence (previous utterances from either speaker).
5 Training Details
We detail the techniques we employ during pre-
training and ﬁne-tuning.
Pre-training Ranking models. We perform pre-
training using the Fairseq (Ott et al., 2019) toolkit.
Our 256M parameter ranking model is identical to
the pre-trained model released by Humeau et al.(2019). Our 622M model is pre-trained using a
simple Masked Language Model objective on the
same data and dictionary as the large Generative
models. We took all hyperparameter choices from
those recommended in RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019).
Pre-training Generative models. We perform
pre-training using the Fairseq (Ott et al., 2019)
toolkit. Our 2.7B and 9.4B parameter models were
both trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma
and Ba, 2014). In order to ﬁt the larger models onto
nodes, we utilize Megatron-LM style model par-
allelism (Shoeybi et al., 2019), in which the Feed
Forward network (FFN) and Multihead Attention
layers of the Transformer are “vertically” sliced,
minimizing the need for communication across
GPUs. We also evaluated Adafactor (Shazeer and
Stern, 2018), which allows for larger batch sizes,
but we found it converged to a worse place than
Adam. In all cases, we use a variant of mixed pre-
cision training (Micikevicius et al., 2017), storing
gradients and optimizer state in FP32, but accumu-
lating model parameters directly in FP16 (Ott et al.,
2019). A dynamic loss scalar is utilized to pre-
vent gradient underﬂow (Micikevicius et al., 2017).
Both our 2.7B and 9.4B parameter models were
trained with batches of approximately 500k label
BPE tokens per batch. The 2.7B parameter model
trained for approximately 200k SGD updates with a
maximum learning rate of 2e-4, a linear warmup of
3125 steps, and an invsqrt LR scheduler (Vaswani
et al., 2017); the model had not converged when
we stopped. The 9.4B parameter model was trained
with a maximum learning rate of 1.15e-4 and 2400
warmup steps for a total of 200k SGD updates, and
did not appear to be overﬁtting.
Fine-tuning. We ﬁne-tune our models using the
ParlAI toolkit (Miller et al., 2017), which spe-
cializes in training and evaluating dialogue mod-
els. As opposed to the above pre-training, we uti-
lize GPipe-style model parallelism (Huang et al.,
2019), in which full layers are sharded across dif-
ferent GPUs, and each minibatch is further split
into micro-batches to ensure maximum throughput.
As in pre-training, we found that Adam outper-
formed Adafactor during ﬁne-tuning, and we uti-
lized Fairseq-style mixed precision training. Mod-
els were ﬁne-tuned to convergence, with maximum
learning rates of between 1e-6 and 1e-5.
Figure 3: Sample conversation from the Blended Skill Talk dataset, which blends three skills that previous datasets
(ConvAI2, WoW, ED) have focused on. Individual utterances are annotated with the single-skill datasets they
are reminiscent of. The conversation here has been seeded with two utterances from WoW. For details about the
Guided and Unguided workers (U,G) set up, see Smith et al. (2020).
6 Training Data
We next discuss the training data we use, which is
all in English (#BenderRule).
6.1 Pre-training
pushshift.io Reddit We use a variant of Reddit
discussions, which has also been used in several
existing studies, see e.g. Yang et al. (2018); Mazaré
et al. (2018); Keskar et al. (2019); Shuster et al.
(2019). Following Humeau et al. (2019), we use
a previously existing Reddit dataset extracted and
obtained by a third party and made available on
pushshift.io (Baumgartner et al., 2020), training to
generate a comment conditioned on the full thread
leading up to the comment, spanning 1.5B training
examples from Reddit obtained from PushShift3
through July 2019. The subreddits cover a vast
range of topics, and hence the dataset is a good
candidate for helping train a dialogue model in
the open-domain case. We apply heuristic rules
to ﬁlter the dataset with the goal of providing a
cleaner training signal. We remove the comment
and all subsequent child comments if any of the
following conditions are met:
3https://files.pushshift.io/reddit/1. The author is a known bot.
2.It comes from a known non-English subreddit.
3.The comment is marked as removed / deleted.
4.It is longer than 2048 characters and does not
contain spaces.
5. It is longer than 128 BPE tokens.
6. It is shorter than 5 characters.
7. It contains a URL.
8. It starts with a non-ASCII character.
9. It is further than depth 7 in the thread.
Models were trained with maximum context and
response lengths set to 128 BPE tokens, and longer
examples were truncated. Our ﬁnal dataset contains
1.50B comments totaling 56.8B label BPE tokens
and 88.8B context tokens.4We divide the corpus
into 4096 roughly-equal sized chunks, stratiﬁed by
thread ID (such that no two comments from the
same post appear across folds), and reserve the
last two chunks for validation and test respectively,
each approximately 0.02% of the full dataset ( 
360k comments each).
4Note that the 90M model discussed later in the paper uses
a variant of the corpus with less ﬁltering. See Shuster et al.
(2019) for details.
6.2 Fine-tuning
Our pre-training data, though large, contains data
consisting of group discussions, rather than direct
two-way conversational data. While it has a lot of
useful content, it also still has a lot of noise, even
after ﬁltering. In contrast, the academic commu-
nity has produced a number of smaller, but cleaner,
more focused tasks, typically collected via crowd-
workers, which have been made publicly available.
These tasks can more accurately provide traits that
are desirable for our models. For example, the
ConvAI2 dataset (Zhang et al., 2018) focuses on
personality and engaging the other speaker, Empa-
thetic Dialogues (Rashkin et al., 2019) focuses on
empathy, and Wizard of Wikipedia (Dinan et al.,
2019c) focuses on knowledge. Finally, Blended
Skill Talk (Smith et al., 2020) provides a dataset
that focuses on blending these skills.
ConvAI2: ConvAI2 is a dataset used at the
NeurIPS 2018 competition of the same name, and
is based on PersonaChat (Zhang et al., 2018; Dinan
et al., 2020). The training data of 140k utterances
involves paired crowdworkers having a conversa-
tion where they get to know each other, in which
each is given a role to play based on sentences de-
scribing their persona, which were also separately
crowdsourced (both speakers can see their own
persona description, but cannot see their partner’s
persona). The task thus involves getting to know
the other speaker and engaging them in friendly
conversation, both asking and answering questions
– useful skills for an open-domain conversational
agent. Models trained on this task are thus con-
ditioned on the persona and the dialogue history,
which are concatenated. It was previously shown
this dataset helps provide more engaging dialogue,
and that the use of persona gives improved consis-
tency for the bot.
Empathetic Dialogues (ED): Rashkin et al.
(2019) constructed the Empathetic Dialogues
dataset, which consists of 50k utterances of crowd-
worker conversations grounded in an emotional
situation. In each dialogue, one speaker describes
a personal situation and the other plays a “listener”
role, displaying empathy during the discussion.
Trained models are measured playing the part of
the empathetic listener. It was previously shown
ﬁne-tuning models on this dataset helps them dis-
play more empathy in human evaluations.Wizard of Wikipedia (WoW): The Wizard of
Wikipedia task involves discussing a given topic
in depth, where the goal is to both engage the part-
ner as well as display expert knowledge (Dinan
et al., 2019c). The dataset consists of 194k utter-
ances over 1250 topics, where each conversation
begins with a randomly chosen topic. A retrieval
system over Wikipedia was used from which the
dialogues were grounded during the human-human
crowdsourced conversations. The topics were also
crowdsourced and range from e-books to toga par-
ties to showers. In most of our models we use
the simpler version of the task where we only use
the ﬁnal conversations for ﬁne-tuning, ignoring the
retrieval aspect of the task. For our knowledge re-
trieve and reﬁne model (Sec. 2.3) we do also use
the gold retrieved knowledge (“checked sentence”)
for training the retrieval system. It was previously
shown for generative models that using such knowl-
edge was rated higher in human evaluation than
without when discussing topics in depth.
Blended Skill Talk: Blended Skill Talk (Smith
et al., 2020) aims to blend the previous three tasks
to combine the skills from them (engaging per-
sonality from ConvAI2, empathy from ED, and
knowledge from WoW) seamlessly during dialogue.
To that end, a dialogue dataset of 76k utterances
was collected with a guided and unguided human
speaker, where the guided speaker could select ut-
terances suggested by bots trained on the three in-
dividual tasks, see Figure 3. It was shown that this
additional blended data, multi-tasked with the pre-
vious three tasks, helped maintain all three skills in
open-domain dialogue. In subsequent experiments
we will refer to the “BST tasks” as training on all
four tasks together.
In each blended dialogue, the model is provided
a two sentence persona to condition on following
PersonaChat, and additionally during one third of
the conversations a WoW topic name as well (see
Figure 3). During evaluations, we equip our models
with randomly chosen personas and, one third of
the time, topics from this set as well, mirroring the
way the model is trained.
7 Safety Characteristics
As models are trained to mimic human-human con-
versations, they can sometimes learn undesirable
features from this human-human data, such as the
use of toxic or biased language. The BST tasks
we use for ﬁne-tuning were collected from crowd-
workers who were given explicit instructions to not
use such language, and hence are generally safer
than our pre-training data from pushshift.io Reddit.
Nevertheless, issues can still remain.
We have previously investigated building better
classiﬁers of toxic language by collecting adver-
sarial toxic data that fools existing classiﬁers and
is then used as additional data to make them more
robust, in a series of rounds (Dinan et al., 2019b).
We can apply such a classiﬁer at test time to de-
tect toxic language before it is shown, but we note
that such classiﬁers are still not infallible. In our
experiments section we will gauge how often such
classiﬁers ﬂag responses generated from the mod-
els.
We have also previously conducted studies into
mitigating gender bias in dialogue through the use
of conditional generation, controlling the amount
of gendered words to be more neutral, with pre-
liminary success (Dinan et al., 2019a). This is not
currently added to the system described in this pa-
per, but should be considered for future updates.
8 Evaluation Methods
ACUTE-Eval While we employ and report au-
tomatic metrics, our main evaluation involves the
ACUTE-Eval procedure (Li et al., 2019b), whereby
evaluators are asked to make pairwise evaluations
of complete dialogues. An example of ACUTE-
Eval is shown in Figure 4. ACUTE-Eval affords ad-
vantages over both single-turn pairwise and multi-
turn Likert evaluations. The explicit use of com-
parisons avoids the per annotator bias in numerical
(Likert) scores (e.g., annotators who tend to give
generous scores), and remedies many of the is-
sues of sequential effects such as contrasting with
a previous example (Mathur et al., 2017), while
still providing the ability to expose issues that are
present only in multi-turn evaluations.
Furthermore, the pairwise setup facilitates repli-
cation and efﬁcient reuse of data: conversations
collected in previous trials and by other systems
can be directly compared with a new system, with-
out having to recollect additional data. This can
signiﬁcantly reduce the resources needed by a new
evaluation, and ensure that multiple papers are com-
paring to prior work consistently. In particular, this
makes it possible to compare to logs from Meena
(Adiwardana et al., 2020) even though the model
itself has not been made publicly available.
We consider two evaluation questions, derived
Figure 4: ACUTE-Eval has human annotators directly
compare multi-turn conversations with different sys-
tems.
from (Li et al., 2019b):
Engagingness question: “Who would you pre-
fer to talk to for a long conversation?”
Humanness question: “Which speaker sounds
more human?”
The phrasing of these questions were themselves
optimized in that work to maximize agreement,
and we hence re-use those exact phrasings. It was
shown that different phrasings can result in weaker
levels of agreement, and that engagingness and
humanness clearly do not measure the same thing.
Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval Nevertheless, full hu-
man evaluations are time consuming and costly,
requiring humans to spend time conducting conver-
sations with bots as well as scoring them. As an
alternative, it was shown in Li et al. (2019b) that
ACUTE-Eval can also work in “self-chat” mode,
where models are used for both sides of a conversa-
tion, instead of human-model chat. This eliminates
the requirement of the initial chat collection, and
conversations may be generated without human
involvement, dramatically reducing the resource
requirements of evaluation. Results from self-chat
experiments highly correlate with those of human-
chat experiments, for most, but not all systems (Li
et al., 2019b). This mirrors other successes in using
self-play, self-chat, and simulated users to evaluate
dialogue systems (Fazel-Zarandi et al., 2017; Shah
et al., 2018a,b; Wei et al., 2018; Ghandeharioun
et al., 2019). We use this procedure for some of
our modeling and hyperparameter choices where
the full ACUTE-Eval would end up too costly, and
only use the full human-bot chat evaluation at the
ﬁnal stage. In this work we use the BST-setting
to perform self-chats, i.e. models are given the
personas, topics and previous utterances to initi-
ate the conversation, see Section 6.2 and Figure 3.
Note that when using deterministic methods such
as beam decoding, this prevents the models from
generating the same conversation repeatedly.
9 Related Work
The area of open-domain dialogue has made sig-
niﬁcant progress recently with end-to-end neural
approaches. The ConvAI2 competition at NeurIPS
2018 featured large pre-trained Transformers for
the top two winning teams (Dinan et al., 2020).
In particular, Wolf et al. (2019) pre-trained via
the method of Radford et al. (2018) using the
BooksCorpus dataset, resulting in the best per-
plexities and F1 scores. Since then, results have
improved further with the advent of larger, im-
proved pre-training (Lewis et al., 2019; Shuster
et al., 2019). In general this extends beyond Con-
vAI2 to many open-domain dialogue datasets, such
as daily dialogue and Cornell Movies (He et al.,
2019), and also when multi-tasking across many of
these datasets, as we also do here (Shuster et al.,
2019; Smith et al., 2020).
A particular large-scale model of note that we
compare to in this work is Meena (Adiwardana
et al., 2020), a 2.6B parameter Transformer-based
model trained on 341 GB of text, that was shown to
be superior to variants of DialoGPT (Zhang et al.,
2019), Mitsuku5, Cleverbot6, and XiaoIce (Shum
et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2020). The evaluation
metric used was SSA, the average of sensibleness
and speciﬁcity, as judged by human raters either
in static or interactive setups, which is shown to
highly correlate with asking raters how “humanlike”
the model is. We note however that the authors
themselves state it may not capture all aspects of
such a test, e.g. might not measure empathy. We
additionally note that neither Meena’s model, the
static “Mini Turing Benchmark” used in the paper,
nor the phrasing of the SSA evaluation question
provided to annotators was released, making cer-
5https://www.pandorabots.com/mitsuku/
6https://www.cleverbot.com/Model C2 WoW ED BST
(K= 20 ) (K= 100 ) (K= 100 ) (K= 100 )
256M 88.55 91.70 62.67 83.45
622M 89.96 93.22 70.15 82.11
Table 1: Hits@1/ Kof ﬁne-tuned poly-encoder models
on the validation set for BST datasets. Hits@1/ Kmea-
sures recall@1 when ranking the gold label among a
set ofK 1other random candidates.
tain comparisons difﬁcult. Further, the human-bot
conversations were conducted by employees and
were not blind to the model type (in the logs they
say phrases such as “Hi Meena!”). In this work we
employ unbiased crowdworkers with reproducible
experiments, and use ACUTE-Eval (Sec. 8) to di-
rectly ask the humanness question, rather than a
proxy. Further, we also report results on engag-
ingness as a main metric, because this measures
more closely whether a human will be interested in
talking to our bots.
10 Results & Analysis
We ﬁrst present automatic evaluation results using
various metrics. As these are only ever a proxy
for human judgments on conversational quality, we
perform human evaluations and describe the results
in the subsequent sections.
10.1 Automatic Evaluations
Retriever We ﬁne-tune the retrieval models on
ConvAI2, Wizard of Wikipedia, Empathetic Dia-
logues, and Blended Skill Talk datasets (BST vari-
ants of each7) and automatically evaluate them by
measuring hits@ 1=Kon the validation sets of each
of these datasets. Results are shown in Table 1.
Generator Before ﬁne-tuning, we assess the per-
formance of our 90M, 2.7B, and 9.4B parameter
models by measuring perplexity on the validation
set from pushshift.io Reddit. For the 90M param-
eter model, results are reported from Shuster et al.
(2019), as we use that same model. Results are
shown in Table 2. Training curves for the pre-
trained models are also provided in Figure 5. We
note that the perplexity of our 2.7B and 9.4B pa-
rameter models are not directly comparable to that
of the 90M parameter model, as these models do
not share the same dictionary.
7https://parl.ai/projects/bst
0.0 40.0 80.0 120.0 160.0 200.0
SGD steps (thousands)121314151617Validation PPL (Pushshift Reddit)13.3
12.2Model
2.7B
9.4BFigure 5: Validation PPL of different sized models.
The larger model achieves a better performance in
fewer steps, consistent with other works (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020).
We also report perplexity both before and after
ﬁne-tuning each of these models on the ConvAI2,
Wizard of Wikipedia, Empathetic Dialogues, and
Blended Skill Talk datasets. Results are shown in
Table 3. They show that ﬁne-tuning gives relatively
large improvements in perplexity on these tasks,
which could hence translate into improved ability
at these skills when conducting open-domain dia-
logue.
Retrieve and Reﬁne (RetNRef) We also report
perplexity on each of these datasets for our dia-
logue retrieve and reﬁne variants in Table 3. We
note a small increase in perplexity – relative to
the standard generator models – on each of these
datasets. This small increase in perplexity was
also observed in Weston et al. (2018), even though
the retrieve and reﬁne models outperformed the
baseline generator models in human evaluations
in those experiments. As such, we cannot rely on
automatic evaluations alone to assess the relative
performance of retrieve and reﬁne and generator
models.
Safety We also analyzed the behavior of some
of our generative models in terms of unsafe gener-
ated sequences. We produced generations given
pushshift.io Reddit and ConvAI2 validation set
contexts using our 90M parameter models with
and without BST ﬁne-tuning. We then assessed
whether those generations were safe or not using
two different methods: using an unsafe word list,
or the safety classiﬁer of Dinan et al. (2019b), both
methods being available in ParlAI (Miller et al.,
2017). We also compare our generations to thegold human responses, assessing whether they are
safe or not too.
The results are given in Table 4. First, they show
humans do utter unsafe responses, which our mod-
els will likely imitate if provided in their training
data. ConvAI2, one of the BST datasets, contains
much fewer unsafe utterances from humans than
pushshift.io Reddit. This explains why, when we
ﬁne-tune our models on the BST tasks, they also
reply with fewer unsafe utterances than models
trained on pushshift.io Reddit alone.
While lists of banned words are easier to ﬁlter
out of training, unsafe utterances consisting of oth-
erwise safe words are harder to avoid – which is
what the safety classiﬁer used can also detect. We
note that simply training on ﬁltered data would not
solve this problem due to the tendency of gener-
ative models to copy their current context, so at
deploy time, they could still be provoked by unsafe
user contexts. We can of course apply these safety
classiﬁers at test/deploy time to further reduce the
unsafe responses from these models, but note that if
the classiﬁer is erroneous, unsafe utterances could
still get through.
10.2 Self-Chat Evaluations
We next perform a number of self-chat ACUTE-
Evals (see Sec. 8) over various modeling choices,
using the engagingness question and 140 trials
per pair compared. This serves as an efﬁcient alter-
native to a full evaluation in order for us to perform
model selection over a large number of choices.
We ﬁnally conduct a full evaluation on the selected
best performing models in the subsequent section.
Retrieval vs. Generator vs. RetNRef We ﬁrst
compared the three model types described in Sec.
2: retrieval, generative and (dialogue) retrieve and
reﬁne (RetNRef). We used the base 90M parame-
ter generative model, the 256M parameter retrieval
model, while RetNRef combines both. All models
are ﬁne-tuned on the BST tasks. For generation we
use standard beam search (beam size 10, no mini-
mum beam decoding constraint, but with context
and response 3-gram blocking).
The results (Figure 6) show RetNRef outper-
forming the pure generation approach, but with
retrieval outperforming both. This initial result
comes with the caveat that relative performance
may be different for differently sized models, or
for different training or decoding strategies, as we
shall see. We explore along those axes in subse-
Name Total Params V L encLdecd h Steps PPL
90M 87,508,992 55K 8 8 512 16 2.86M 25.6
2.7B 2,696,268,800 8K 2 24 2560 32 200K 13.3
9.4B 9,431,810,048 8K 4 32 4096 32 200K 12.2
Table 2: Perplexity on the validation set of pushshift.io Reddit for several generative Transformer models with
given architecture settings. Note that perplexity is not directly comparable between the 90M models and the larger
models as the 90M models use a different dictionary. Columns include the vocabulary size ( V), number of encoder
and decoder layers ( Lenc,Ldec), embedding dimensionality ( d), Multihead Attention Heads ( h), and training steps.
Model Size ConvAI2 WoW ED BST Avg.
pushshift.io Reddit Generative 90M 18.33 31.18 14.44 18.09 20.51
BST Generative 90M 11.36 17.56 11.48 14.65 13.76
BST RetNRef 256M/90M 11.79 18.37 11.87 14.62 14.16
pushshift.io Reddit Generative 2.7B 15.70 13.73 11.06 14.36 13.71
BST Generative 2.7B 8.74 8.78 8.32 10.08 8.98
BST RetNRef 622M/2.7B 9.31 9.28 9.93 10.59 9.78
pushshift.io Reddit Generative 9.4B 15.02 12.88 10.41 13.5 12.95
BST Generative 9.4B 8.36 8.61 7.81 9.57 8.59
Table 3: Perplexity of the pre-trained and ﬁne-tuned models on the validation set for BST datasets. Note
that perplexity is not directly comparable between the 90M models and the larger models as 90M models use a
different dictionary. Fine-tuning gives gains for each skill (task) compared to pre-training on pushshift.io Reddit
alone.
pushshift.io Reddit ConvAI2
Method Word List Classiﬁer Word List Classiﬁer
Human 12.9% 18.5% 0.32% 3.8%
Reddit Gen 4.4% 17.8% 0.10% 12.1%
BST Gen 0.6% 9.5% 0.05% 1.6%
Table 4: Safety of utterances, before ﬁltering
through a safety classiﬁer. We compare human, pre-
trained and ﬁne-tuned 90M model responses given
pushshift.io Reddit and ConvAI2 contexts using either
an unsafe word list or a trained classiﬁer from (Dinan
et al., 2019b). The pushshift.io Reddit dataset con-
tains more unsafe contexts, leading to more unsafe re-
sponses. Models ﬁne-tuned on the safer BST tasks
are less toxic than the pre-trained pushshift.io Reddit
model on either type of dataset context.
quent trials. This mirrors results found in some
recent papers comparing generation and retrieval
(Li et al., 2016; Dinan et al., 2019c). In order for
generation methods to do better, we need to im-
prove their recipe.
Generator Decoding choices We next compare
different ways of controlling the response length inLoss %
Gen Ret RetNRefWin %Generative 3340
Retrieval 6760
RetNRef 6040
Figure 6: Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval (engagingness)
shows Retrieve and Reﬁne ( = 0:5) outperforms
its Generative (90M, beam search decoding) but not
its Retrieval (256M) counterpart, all using BST ﬁne-
tuning.indicates signiﬁcance (two-tailed binomial
test,(p<0:05)). x
beam search (Sec. 4.3): controlling the minimum
beam length (in terms of BPE tokens) with a ﬁxed
hyperparameter, or by adjusting it with a predictor
of the optimal length.
The results, shown in Figure 7 show that both
methods improve signiﬁcantly over not controlling
the length, as in standard beam search. In the re-
mainder of the experiments in the paper we thus
chose a minimum beam length of 20 BPE tokens.
We then investigate the use of beam blocking,
the results are shown in Figure 8. Blocking tends to
increase performance, in line with other works, al-
Generative 2.7B model: Min Beam Length
Constrained vs. Unconst.
Min. Length 5 52 48
Min. Length 10 6832
Min. Length 20 8317
Min. Length 40 8218
Predictive (5,10,15,20) 6931
Predictive (10,20,30,40) 8119
Figure 7: Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval (engagingness)
shows controlling minimum beam length gives large
gains in engagingness compared to not controlling it,
according to humans, with 20 being best. All rows are
signiﬁcant (p<0:01) except the ﬁrst.
Generative 2.7B model: Beam Blocking
Block vs. None
3-gram Context Blocks 50 50
3-gram Response Blocks 54 46
3-gram Context + Response Blocks 59 41
Figure 8: Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval (engagingness):
comparing beam-blocking variants. Blocking both con-
text and response 3-grams during generation gives high-
est scores, however, none of these results are signiﬁcant.
though the results were not signiﬁcant. We employ
full blocking in the remainder of our experiments.
Finally, we compare different values of beam
size to other search strategies: Top- ksampling, and
the sample and rank strategy of Adiwardana et al.
(2020) using Top- k(k= 40 ) and 20 samples.
The results are given in Figure 9, comparing
beam size 10 to alternatives. It appears there is
a sweet spot of beam size, where a value of 10
is superior to 1 or 30, which is then on par with
sampling methods, although none of these results
is signiﬁcant. We employ beam size 10 in the re-
mainder of our experiments.
Small vs. Large models We compare 90M vs.
2.7B parameter generative models in a pairwise test,
both with BST ﬁne-tuning and with the decoding
settings we selected from previous settings.
The results (Figure 10) indicate improvements
from larger models, in line with previous results
(Adiwardana et al., 2020). We note that this comes
at the cost of increased computational resources
being required for training and deployment.
Pre-training vs. Fine-Tuning We compare ﬁne-
tuning our pre-trained generative model on the BSTGenerative 2.7B model
Beam 10 + Block
Alternative vs. + Min. Length 20
Beam size 1 45 55
Beam size 30 42 58
Sample + Rank 52 48
Top-k(k= 40 )50 50
Figure 9: Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval (engagingness):
comparing different generation schemes. None of these
results are statistically signiﬁcant.
Generative models
90M params vs. 2.7B params
43 57
Figure 10: Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval (engagingness)
shows a win for a larger vs. smaller model, but this
result is not statistically signiﬁcant.
tasks, versus using pre-training only.
The results (Figure 11) indicate large improve-
ments from adjusting the model to focus on person-
ality, knowledge and empathy, the three skills in
BST.
Persona context vs. No context given The BST
tasks train models how to use context personas such
as "I design video games for a living", see Fig. 3.
This context can both improve the bot’s consistency
as well as add potential talking points that it can
work into the conversation. To tease apart the im-
pact of adding context vs. ﬁne-tuning on BST but
not using contexts at conversation time, we com-
pared them against each other. The results, shown
in Figure 12 indicate a small win for employing
persona contexts, which we thus employ in all our
full evaluations in the next section.8
Likelihood vs. Unlikelihood We compare un-
likelihood training (Sec. 3.4), whereby overex-
pressedn-grams are discouraged ( = 0:25), to con-
ventional training (MLE). The unlikelihood train-
ing has the intended effect of making the system
less “dull” by not using the same common phrases
again and again. We note that this effect would
likely be larger if measured with longer or repeated
conversations with the same user. Nevertheless,
here we perform the same experimental setup as
before.
8We also compared adding a Wizard of Wikipedia-based
topic vs. not to the context, and in that case saw no discernible
difference in evaluation scores.
Generative 2.7B model
Pre-training only vs. BST ﬁne-tuning
39 * 61*
Figure 11: Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval (engagingness)
shows a signiﬁcant gain ( p <0:05) for ﬁne-tuning on
the BST Tasks.
Generative BST 2.7B model
Persona context vs. No context
53 47
Figure 12: Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval (engagingness)
shows a small win (not signiﬁcant) for using persona
contexts after ﬁne-tuning on the BST tasks.
We compare two models which are identical ex-
cept for the training objective: both models are
2.7B parameters, BST ﬁne-tuned with our best cho-
sen decoding settings. The results (Figure 13) have
a small gain against the likelihood model, but this
is not statistically signiﬁcant.
10.3 Full (Human-Bot Chat) Evaluations
The previous section comprised of human pair-
wise evaluations to perform model selection, but
involved self-chats, not human-bot conversations.
In this section we take the learnings from those
evaluations, and evaluate some of the best choices
of model in our full human-bot evaluation setup.
For human-bot conversation data collection we
used the same setting proposed in (Adiwardana
et al., 2020): open-ended chat that begins with the
message "Hi!" from the human to the bot, and has
a minimum interactive conversation length of 14
turns, collecting 100 conversations per model via
crowdworkers. We do not apply a safety classiﬁer
to our models, but we do apply it to the human
responses, and remove crowdworker conversations
that were ﬂagged.
Retrieval vs. Generator vs. RetNRef We per-
form an evaluation (engagingness question) similar
to the self-chat version of Figure 6, except using
human-bot conversations, and the generative and
RetNRef models here use the improved decoding
choices. This results in stronger generation and
RetNRef models, which both now beat the retrieval
method, see Figure 14.
The main difference to our initial self-chat ex-
periments (Figure 6) is that our decoding now gen-
erates longer responses using a minimum beamGenerative BST 2.7B model
MLE vs. Unlikelihood
46 54
Figure 13: Self-Chat ACUTE-Eval (engagingness)
MLE vs. Unlikelihood training (penalizing overex-
pressedn-grams). The result is not statistically signiﬁ-
cant (165 trials).
Loss %
Ret Gen RetNRefWin %Retrieval 2930
Generative 7144
RetNRef 7056
Figure 14: Human-bot ACUTE-Eval (engagingness):
Retrieve and Reﬁne( = 0:5) and Generative (90M,
beam search decoding, min beam size 20) beat Re-
trieval (256M). All results are signiﬁcant ( p < 0:01)
except for RetNRef vs. Generative.
length constraint. This makes the generative mod-
els now outperform the retrieval model, but it also
removes the gains from retrieve and reﬁne over the
generative model. We note that if we remove the
minimum beam length constraint in both retrieve
and reﬁne and the generative model and collect
new human-bot chats, and a pairwise ACUTE-Eval,
we instead get that RetNRef has a statistically sig-
niﬁcant improvement over our generative model
(p<0:001).
Comparison to Meena We compare our models
to Meena (Adiwardana et al., 2020) by comparing
pairwise against the publicly available logs. We
note that only some of the logs were made avail-
able, as some toxic conversations were removed,
which may affect the evaluations, but we use all
logs that are publicly available. We compare them
with several variants of our models, using both
the engagingness and humanness questions. The
results are given in Figures 15 and 16. We ﬁrst
observe several results that are in line with the self-
chat results from the previous section:
(i)Using BST (BST Generative 2.7B) is supe-
rior to pre-training only (pushshift.io Reddit
Generative 2.7B)
(ii)Beam search with a minimum beam length
of 20 (BST Generative 2.7B) is superior to
having no minimum length (BST Generative
(2.7B) std. beam)
Ours vs. Meena
BST Generative (2.7B) std. beam 50 50
pushshift.io Reddit Generative (2.7B) 53 47
BST RetNRef (256M/90M) 6040
BST Generative(90M) 6139
Wiz Generative (2.7B) 6139
BST Unlikelihood (2.7B) 6436
BST Generative (9.4B) 6733
BST RetNRef (622M/2.7B) 7030
BST Generative (2.7B) 7525
Figure 15: Human-Chat ACUTE-Eval of engaging-
ness, various models compared to Meena. Our best
models are considered more engaging than Meena,
rows with(p < 0:05) and(p < 0:01) are statis-
tically signiﬁcant. Larger generative models with BST
ﬁne-tuning and length-controlled decoding work best.
(iii) The larger BST Generative (2.7B) is superior
to the smaller model BST Generative (90M).
We ﬁnd RetNRef models (both dialogue version
and using knowledge retrieval) do not improve over
their generative counterparts when using the best
decoding schemes for the generative models. Our
largest BST Generative 9.4B model does well on
the humanness question, but performs worse on
engagingness compared to our 2.7B model, despite
having lower perplexity, showing correlation be-
tween these metrics is not straightforward. We ver-
iﬁed this result further by performing an ACUTE-
Eval of engagingness directly comparing the 2.7B
and 9.4B against each other, which resulted in a
56% win for the smaller model, aligning with the
other results. Future work should aim to understand
this result further.
Our best models improve signiﬁcantly over
Meena, with BST Generative 2.7B winning 75%
of the time in pairwise match-ups for the engag-
ingness question and 65% for the humanness ques-
tion. Meena generally tends to fare better at the
humanness question than the engagingness ques-
tion, which is line with the goals and modeling
choices in that work.
Model vs. Human-human Chat Comparisons
Rather than comparing different models pairwise,
we can also compare a model directly to human
performance, by running ACUTE-Evals with a bot-
human chat vs. a human-human chat. We test
the same models in this setup using the human-
human chat logs from Adiwardana et al. (2020).
Results are given in Figure 17. We see many of the
same trends, but ﬁnd that human-human chats areOurs vs. Meena
BST Generative (2.7B) std. beam 46 54
BST RetNRef (256M/90M) 49 51
pushshift.io Reddit Generative (2.7B) 56 44
BST Generative (90M) 59 41
Wiz Generative (2.7B) 59* 41 *
BST RetNRef (622M/2.7B) 6535
BST Generative (2.7B) 6535
BST Generative (9.4B) 6634
BST Unlikelihood (2.7B) 7030
Figure 16: Human-Chat ACUTE-Eval of humanness ,
various models compared to Meena. Our best models
are considered more humanlike than Meena, rows with
andare statistically signiﬁcant.
Model vs. Human
Meena (Adiwardana et al., 2020) 2872
BST Generative (2.7B) std. beam 2179
pushshift.io Reddit Generative (2.7B) 3664
BST RetNRef (256M/90M) 3763
BST Generative (90M) 42 58
BST Generative (9.4B) 45 55
BST RetNRef (622M/2.7B) 46 54
Wiz Generative (2.7B) 47 53
BST Unlikelihood (2.7B) 48 52
BST Generative (2.7B) 49 51
Figure 17: ACUTE-Eval of engagingness of models
vs. humans by comparing human-bot logs to human-
human logs. Rows withare statistically signiﬁcant.
a more challenging barometer for our models to be
compared to.
Response Length We show the average response
length statistics (in terms of BPE 8k dictionary to-
kens) of some of the models in Figure 18. We com-
pare Generative BST (2.7B) with and without beam
length constraints. With the constraint (of 20), the
average response length is around 21 tokens, so the
beam search often ends as soon as the constraint
is fulﬁlled. In contrast, without the constraint the
average length is 9.5. Meena’s average length is
10.4, and humans engaged in human-human chats
is 18.0. Humans speaking to models (or other hu-
mans) will often match response length if they are
engaged in the conversation, and there appears to be
correlation of their average response length with en-
gagement (intuitively, humans are expending time
and energy typing keys on their keyboard, which
they are more likely to do if engaged).
Model Model Human Partner
Meena 10.4 8.2
BST Gen (2.7B) std beam. 9.5 11.3
BST Gen (2.7B) 21.3 16.3
Human 18.0 18.0
Figure 18: Response length statistics for various mod-
els. We note the best performing methods have longer
response lengths, and humans interacting with them
have longer response lengths in kind.
10.4 Example Successful Conversations
We give several examples of what we consider
successful conversations between crowdworkers
and the Generative BST 2.7B model in Figures
19 and 20. The topics span from cooking, music,
movies and pets to yoga, veganism, instruments
and malls – often with the model going into detail
when asked, naming relevant stores, bands, movies,
actors, pet species and pet names. We also pro-
vide two slightly more probing examples which
are conversations between a paper author and the
models in Figures 21. In the ﬁrst example we ask
for comparison between Bach and Justin Bieber,
with fairly nuanced and detailed answers from the
bot. In the second example we ask the bot to write
a song, which it attempts to do, even though the
lyrics it generates could not be called deeply poetic.
10.5 Failure Cases and Model Extensions
While performance in the ACUTE-Eval setup ap-
pears at ﬁrst sight to be very strong (e.g. 49% to
51% for our 2.7B generative model compared to
human-human logs), we do not believe we are any-
where near as close to solving the problem of open-
domain conversation as this evaluation would indi-
cate. Here, we highlight problems with our models,
and elucidate why our evaluation does not capture
them. Selected example failures from crowdworker
logs are given as conversation snippets in Figure
23, and further failures constructed by the paper
authors in Figure 24.
Vocabulary Usage It has been observed that gen-
erative models employing beam search decoding
(or other methods that approximately choose the
most likely utterance) tend to generate common
words too frequently, and rare words too infre-
quently, as compared to the human distribution
(Holtzman et al., 2018; Welleck et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2019a). In dialogue, humans can inter-
pret this as technically correct, but unengaging,in the extreme this is the so-called “I don’t know”
problem, where models tend to output such non-
committal utterances. Using sampling to select
lower likelihood generations can help, but at the
risk of saying something which makes less sense.
It appears that even our best models using beam
search are still exhibiting such behavior. We have
found that encouraging the length of the genera-
tions to be longer helps, in that the model is forced
to generate something more detailed, but the prob-
lem still remains. Figure 22 shows the most com-
monly occurring 3-grams in the conversation logs
with crowdworkers for the BST Generative 2.7B
model, and their counts. Given that there are only
100 conversations, the expressions “do you like”,
“lot of fun”, “have any hobbies” etc. are clearly
over-expressed compared to human-human con-
versations. We note that the current evaluation
does not seem to expose this as boring because
the conversations are short and are evaluated sepa-
rately. We applied unlikelihood training to reduce
this over-expression, which successfully reduced
this overexpression during training, and also in the
ﬁnal conversation logs with humans, as shown in
Figure 22. Unfortunately, this made a very small
or negative impact in our ACUTE-Evals of engag-
ingness, see Figures 15 and 17, although this did
score highly in terms of humanness, see Figure 16.
For engagingness, as explained, we believe this
is because the current evaluation technique em-
ploying short conversations cannot measure this
phenomenon well.
Nontrivial Repetition A related issue is that
generative models also have a tendency to repeat
(Holtzman et al., 2019). While beam blocking can
be applied as a band-aid to ﬁx some of these prob-
lems, resulting in improved performance, deeper
issues remain. There remains a tendency for mod-
els to say that they have a pet dog as well if you
say you have one, and that they love walking it too,
they like the same bands as you, etc. This is both
present in our failure examples (Figures 23 and 24)
and our cherry-picked good examples, see Figures
19 and 20. We observe this in the logs of other gen-
erative systems, e.g., Meena as well. While this can
be engaging that the bot tends to agree with many
things you say, control of this seems desirable. One
possibility is applying unlikelihood training for that
goal as well, to minimize context repeats (Li et al.,
2019a). Adding a persona to the bot is another
plausible way to do this. We have added simple
Crowdworker Generative BST 2.7B Crowdworker Generative BST 2.7B
Figure 19: Cherry-picked crowdworker examples. Two conversations between different crowdworkers (left
speakers) and the Generative BST 2.7B model (right speakers).
two line personas following BST (See Figure 3),
but this would need to be much more detailed to
cover all possible cases, so it is unclear if that is
a satisfactory solution. Perhaps one way to track
this would be to ask human evaluators if the bot is
following their persona, as the current evaluation
setup is unlikely to penalize this copycat behavior.
Contradiction and Forgetfulness Our models
do occasionally contradict themselves, see Figure
23, although we observed this happens less often
in the larger models. We believe due to the nature
of language modeling, typical language patterns do
not contain contradictions, but probing the model
with unusual responses would likely expose this
behavior again. A second related problem is what
appears as “forgetfulness” to the human observer,
where for example you tell the model you have
a dog, but then later in the conversation it asks
what pets do you have. This phenomenon can be
attributed to the fact that the model fails to make
the logical link that it should not ask that ques-
tion, rather than the model actually “forgetting" (if
the previous response is in its dialogue context).
Again, we observe this relatively rarely, but webelieve it can be exposed further by probing the
model. While some recent work has posed possible
solutions for these issues (Li et al., 2019a), they
have not yet been fully resolved.
Knowledge and Factual Correctness In our ex-
perience it is actually relatively easy to goad our
models into making factual errors. Perhaps surpris-
ingly, they appear relatively rarely in crowdworker
conversations with the bots. We believe this is due
to the nature of the evaluation conducted: the con-
versations start with “Hi!” and tend to cover only
shallow topics whereby the speakers get to know
each other, and they are rarely long enough to go
deeper into a topic. Exploring a more focused topic
of conversation would likely expose the model’s
weaknesses. On the contrary, it appears that the
model is good at dodging this issue. We observe
that our models often switch topics – avoiding the
challenge of going “deeper" – which could be a
side effect of the ConvAI2 dataset which exhibits
this behavior. The Wizard of Wikipedia dataset,
however, does not exhibit this behavior, and its
construction was speciﬁcally aimed to avoid this.
We implemented a model that directly incorporated
Crowdworker Generative BST 2.7B Crowdworker Generative BST 2.7B
Crowdworker Generative BST 2.7B Crowdworker Generative BST 2.7B
Figure 20: Cherry-picked crowdworker examples. Four conversations between different crowdworkers (left
speakers) and the Generative BST 2.7B model (right speakers).
Paper author Generative BST 2.7B Paper author Generative BST 2.7B
Figure 21: Cherry-picked author examples. Paper author (left speaker) conversations with Generative BST 2.7B
model (right speaker).
reading Wikipedia (Wiz Generative 2.7B, Sec 2.3),
and anecdotally one can ﬁnd cases where it can em-
ploy knowledge that the pure sequence to sequence
model cannot, see Figure 24. Unfortunately the
reading of knowledge only had a negative impact in
ACUTE-Evals compared to a similarly sized model
without knowledge retrieval, see Figure 17. We
believe this is due to a mixture of (i) deeper knowl-
edge rarely being required in the current evaluation
setup; and (ii) the model attempting to use knowl-
edge when there is no need, or using it incorrectly.
True open-domain dialogue agents should be able
to use knowledge effectively, and to achieve that
we have to be able to measure that effectively.
Conversation Length and Memory Our cur-
rent evaluation involves very short (14-turn) one-
shot conversations. Our bots likely would be repet-
itive and dull over the course of several days or
weeks of conversation, as described above, and they
are also currently completely incapable of even re-membering earlier conversations. Our generative
architectures which are standard Transformers have
a hard limit of 128 BPE tokens of history, so cannot
possibly expand upon things they have learnt from
or about the user, refer to previous things they said,
etc. While several recent works have extended neu-
ral architectures to possess longer contexts (Dai
et al., 2019; Rae et al., 2020; Kitaev et al., 2020;
Beltagy et al., 2020), we have neither implemented
those, nor do we believe the current evaluation
setup is the right one for measuring their success.
Deeper Understanding Finally, while our mod-
els appear to chitchat with some degree of effective-
ness, their ability to truly understand must be ques-
tioned. The contradiction and forgetfulness fail-
ure cases also emphasize this, but we give deeper
failure case examples in Figure 25. In the exam-
ples, the authors of this paper try to query the bot
whether it can understand two puns. The ﬁrst re-
quires understanding the semantic connection be-
n-gram MLE Unlikelihood Human
Do you have 110 60 6
you have any 82 46 2
a lot of 74 46 14
What do you 57 20 6
you like to 54 43 1
What kind of 45 41 4
do you like 44 33 6
like to do 42 28 0
lot of fun 39 18 0
do you do 38 14 6
I like to 36 9 2
That sounds like 36 37 0
you have a 34 15 5
have any hobbies 34 22 0
sounds like a 33 35 4
Figure 22: Counts of most common 3-grams from
the BST Generative 2.7B model (likelihood) from the
conversation logs when talking to crowdworkers, com-
pared to those of the same model trained with unlikeli-
hood, and to human logs (for the same number of utter-
ances).
tween hay, Harvard and horses, which the model
at one point claims it understands, but clearly does
not. Its lack of understanding can be strongly con-
trasted with its ability to describe knowledge about
the location of Harvard or horses. This recalls a
quote due to Feynman, “There’s a big difference
between knowing the name of something and know-
ing something”. We note that these models cannot
be taught a concept through further conversation,
so as-is they will always be stunted, see (Weston,
2016; Hancock et al., 2019) for early work in this
direction. Further, these models, which are disem-
bodied, also have no way of grounding to entities,
actions and experience in the world, which could
also stunt their abilities (Bisk et al., 2020). See
Urbanek et al. (2019); Prabhumoye et al. (2020)
for other work by some of the authors connecting
dialogue models to rich environments.
Further Notes on Evaluation Several of the pre-
vious points raised issues concerning our evalua-
tion protocol. Our set-up involves short multi-turn
conversations with no instructions. Extending the
length should expose further weaknesses, however
collecting long conversations with crowdworkers
is clearly difﬁcult, and it is unclear how many turns
would be a sufﬁcient test. We tried a preliminary
experiment of collecting 100 conversations twice
as long (so, 28 turns) to see the performance drop-
off of our models. We compared the second half
of the conversations to the shorter versions for theHuman Generative BST 2.7B
Figure 23: Examples of issues when talking to crowd-
workers with our Generative BST 2.7B model: non-
trivial repetition (top example), forgetfulness (second
example), contradiction (third example, Georgia is not
in the Midwest), hallucinating knowledge (fourth ex-
ample, the long dark and forest are survival games, but
not by the same authors).
same 2.7B generative BST model, but did not see
a statistically signiﬁcant difference, indicating they
either need to be longer, or the whole conversation
has to be evaluated at once. If the latter is required
this becomes difﬁcult for a human annotator who
was not engaged in the conversation itself, as the
material to evaluate will get very large, so our cur-
rent setup will not work. Another possibility is to
keep the conversations short, but to provide instruc-
tion instead. For example, the Wizard of Wikipedia
task (Dinan et al., 2019c) asks speakers to converse
in depth on a randomly chosen topic, changing the
nature of the conversations, and hence the skills the
model will be evaluated on.
Finally, when comparing to human performance,
the quality of the human conversations matters. In
Figure 17 we compared to logs of employees from
Paper Author (human) Generative BST 2.7B
Human Wiz Generative 2.7B
Figure 24: Examples of issues created by paper au-
thors with our Generative BST 2.7B model: nontrivial
repetition (top two examples), forgetfulness (third ex-
ample), and hallucinating knowledge (fourth and ﬁfth
examples). Wojciech Zaremba is an AI Researcher
born in Poland, and Amon Tobin is a Brazilian elec-
tronic musician, which the Wiz Generative model re-
trieves from Wikipedia correctly (last two examples).
The Generative BST 2.7B model which does not use
retrieval instead hallucinates an Italian football player
and an American singer.
Adiwardana et al. (2020). Because they work at
the same company, or perhaps know each other,
these conversations are often rich and engaging.
We also tried comparing to human-human crowd-
worker conversations. In that case crowdworkers
will have no social connection to begin the conver-
sation, and we believe this results in less engag-
ing logs. When comparing to such human-humanPaper Author (human) Generative BST 2.7B
Horses go to hayvard... get it?
No, I don't get it. Can you explain it to me like I'm ﬁve?
Well, Harvard is a school for humans, and horses eat hay...
Yes, I know that. But what does that have to do with the joke? I'm
so confused.
Do you know what hay is?
Yes, it's a type of grain. I just don't see how that's relevant to the
joke.
Do you know what horses are?
Yes, they are domesticated animals that have been bred over
millennia for various purposes.
Do you know what Harvard is?
Yes. It's a university in Boston, Massachusetts, in the United States.
So, what is Hayvard?
I'm not sure, but I do know that it's located in Cambridge.
No, it isn't a real place.
Oh, okay. I didn't know that. Thank you for informing me of that.
It's like a bad pun. Some people think it's funny.
I see. Well, at least I learned something new today. Have a great
day!
What did you learn?
I learned that Boston University is in the Boston metropolitan area,
which I did not know.
Why did the mushroom go to the party?
I'm not sure, but I'm glad it did. I love museums. What do you do for
a living?
No, it was supposed to be a joke.
Oh, sorry. I didn't get it. What kind of joke was it? I like jokes.
The answer is, "because he's a fun guy." Do you get it?
No, I don't. Can you explain it to me like I'm a ﬁve year old?
Yes. Mushrooms are fungi, and "fungi" is pronounced like "fun guy"
Oh, okay. I get it now. Thank you for the explanation. I really
appreciate it.
Are you sure you understand? Can you explain it to me?
Sure. It's a play on the word fungus, which is also pronounced fun
guy.
Close enough.
I'm glad we could come to an agreement. Have a great day, fun guy!
Figure 25: Examples of failure to deeply compre-
hend with our Generative BST 2.7B model. (Top) the
model displays knowledge of various concepts without
understanding what it knows, as indicated by its inabil-
ity to comprehend the pun. (Bottom) The model does a
good job of pretending to understand the pun, but actu-
ally does not.
crowdworker conversations, which we took from
the BST paper (Smith et al., 2020) we found our
models perform better than when compared to em-
ployees. In that case, our generative BST 2.7B
model in an ACUTE-Eval of engagingness beats
humans 56% to 44% (not statistically signiﬁcant),
Paper Author (human) Generative BST 2.7B
Figure 26: Example of persona conditioning in our
Generative BST 9.4B model. One can conﬁgure the
bot with arbitrary personality traits and talking points
by feeding in initial context, thanks to multi-tasking
with the PersonaChat and BST tasks (Zhang et al.,
2018; Smith et al., 2020).
whereas it scored 49% to 51% against employee
chats. We also compared crowdworker humans di-
rectly to employee humans, with a 56% to 44% win
for employees in terms of engagingness, and a 59%
to 41% win in terms of humanness. We believe
utilizing crowdworkers as a barometer for our mod-
els is desirable, as this can yield more replicable
experiments, so ﬁnding a way to close this gap, per-
haps with alternative ways of matching workers or
differing set-ups and instructions remain possible
avenues of investigation.
11 Released code and models
We release our 90M, 2.7B and 9.4B parameter
pre-trained and ﬁne-tuned generative models. De-
tails are available at http://parl.ai/projects/
recipes . We have also provided a script for inter-
acting with the bot with safety ﬁltering built in. All
code for ﬁne-tuning, including the datasets them-
selves is available in ParlAI (Miller et al., 2017).
More details lie on the project page. Finally, code
for evaluating models using ACUTE-Eval (Li et al.,
2019b) is also available and described.
12 Discussion
While our methods have taken a step forward and
achieved improved performance in terms of engag-
ingness and humanness according to human evalua-
tions, we have certainly not yet arrived at a solution
to open-domain dialogue. There are still various is-sues with our models. Firstly, even our best models
still make mistakes: although relatively rarely, they
i) contradict or repeat themselves on occasion, ii)
tend to repeat the same phrases in separate conver-
sations, and iii) hallucinate knowledge as seen in
other generative systems (Massarelli et al., 2019).
Each of these faults naturally leads to future re-
search directions; we made some attempt to rectify
phrase repeats using unlikelihood (Li et al., 2019a)
in Sec. 3.4, and conditioning on knowledge (Dinan
et al., 2019c) in Sec. 2.3, but more needs to be
done.
As the human evaluations are on short dialogues
(14 turns) longer conversations would likely make
these issues appear much worse. Longer conver-
sations would also expose that the Transformer ar-
chitectures we use have a limited dialogue history.
A number of recent architectures attempt to incor-
porate longer memory, and that is also a fruitful
direction, although evaluation is more challenging
as long conversations have to be collected, and eval-
uated. An alternative is to seed the conversation
with a topic or otherwise provide instructions to
the human speaker during evaluation to give the
conversation a certain focus, which would more
deeply probe the skills of the bot. On the mod-
eling side, longer conversations could also make
the choice of context material provided to the bot
more salient. Besides helping with consistency, the
persona and topic that are given as initial context
in Blended Skill Talk can help models introduce
interesting talking points in the conversation. How-
ever, they would need to be far more detailed for
longer or repeated conversations to help the mod-
els be consistent and avoid repetition, and in our
current experimental setup did not affect evalua-
tions strongly. We note the context our model is
trained to be able to condition on can also be used
to conﬁgure a chatbot persona suitable for a given
desired role, see Figure 26 for an example.
For deployment of a chatbot, being well-behaved
remains a signiﬁcant challenge. In particular, we
expect bots to have more integrity than the average
human (or to even be faultless), but they have much
less understanding of what they are saying than
humans. We have studied improved safety from
toxic language (Dinan et al., 2019b) and mitigating
gender bias in dialogue generation (Dinan et al.,
2019a) but much work remains to be done. While
we have made our models publicly available, we
have not mitigated all safety issues. We believe
their release can help the community work together
to understand further and ﬁx these issues, and we
recommend their use for that line of research.
The work of Adiwardana et al. (2020) showed
that there is a correlation between human evalua-
tion and perplexity, given a ﬁxed decoding scheme.
Of course, language modeling and dialogue agent
training has been optimizing perplexity as a stan-
dard objective for a long time. We argue that while
this is important, other factors are also at play and
cannot be ignored: (1) the choice of training data
is paramount, as shown by our pushshift.io Reddit
(pre-training) vs. Blended Skill Talk experiments;
and (2) decoding algorithms make large differences
for the same ﬁxed perplexity model (Sec. 10.2).
We ﬁnd that while our 2.7B parameter model gives
large gains over our 90M parameter model, our
largest 9.4B model does not have a clear win in
human evaluations over our 2.7B model, despite
having lower perplexity. This is in line with other
results that show the story is more nuanced than
at ﬁrst sight. For example, dialogue competitions
are not always won by the model with the low-
est perplexity (Dinan et al., 2020), and it has been
shown that models that take a small hit in perplex-
ity but provide gains at decoding time can give far
improved results (Welleck et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2019a). Further reﬁning and understanding these
ingredients, and how they help to build the recipe
as a whole, remain important directions.
References
Daniel Adiwardana, Minh-Thang Luong, David R So,
Jamie Hall, Noah Fiedel, Romal Thoppilan, Zi Yang,
Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Gaurav Nemade, Yifeng Lu,
et al. 2020. Towards a human-like open-domain
chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977 .
Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Kee-
gan, Megan Squire, and Jeremy Blackburn. 2020.
The pushshift reddit dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08435 .
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan.
2020. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150 .
Yonatan Bisk, Ari Holtzman, Jesse Thomason, Ja-
cob Andreas, Yoshua Bengio, Joyce Chai, Mirella
Lapata, Angeliki Lazaridou, Jonathan May, Alek-
sandr Nisnevich, Nicolas Pinto, and Joseph Turian.
2020. Experience grounds language. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.10151 .
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Quoc V Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.2019. Transformer-xl: Attentive language mod-
els beyond a ﬁxed-length context. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.02860 .
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack Ur-
banek, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2019a.
Queens are powerful too: Mitigating gender
bias in dialogue generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.03842 .
Emily Dinan, Samuel Humeau, Bharath Chintagunta,
and Jason Weston. 2019b. Build it break it ﬁx it for
dialogue safety: Robustness from adversarial human
attack. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
4537–4546, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Varvara Logacheva, Valentin Ma-
lykh, Alexander Miller, Kurt Shuster, Jack Ur-
banek, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, Iulian Serban,
Ryan Lowe, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Alan W. Black,
Alexander Rudnicky, Jason Williams, Joelle Pineau,
Mikhail Burtsev, and Jason Weston. 2020. The
second conversational intelligence challenge (Con-
vAI2). In The NeurIPS ’18 Competition , pages 187–
208, Cham. Springer International Publishing.
Emily Dinan, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Angela
Fan, Michael Auli, and Jason Weston. 2019c. Wiz-
ard of Wikipedia: Knowledge-powered conversa-
tional agents. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018. Hi-
erarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 889–898.
Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Shang-Wen Li, Jin Cao, Jared
Casale, Peter Henderson, David Whitney, and Al-
borz Geramifard. 2017. Learning robust dialog poli-
cies in noisy environments. In Proceedings of Work-
shop on Conversational AI .
Asma Ghandeharioun, Judy Hanwen Shen, Natasha
Jaques, Craig Ferguson, Noah Jones, Àgata
Lapedriza, and Rosalind W. Picard. 2019. Approx-
imating interactive human evaluation with self-play
for open-domain dialog systems. Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems .
Braden Hancock, Antoine Bordes, Pierre-Emmanuel
Mazare, and Jason Weston. 2019. Learning from
dialogue after deployment: Feed yourself, chatbot!
InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
3667–3684, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Tianxing He, Jun Liu, Kyunghyun Cho, Myle Ott, Bing
Liu, James Glass, and Fuchun Peng. 2019. Mix-
review: Alleviate forgetting in the pretrain-ﬁnetune
framework for neural language generation models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07117 .
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, Antoine
Bosselut, David Golub, and Yejin Choi. 2018.
Learning to write with cooperative discriminators.
InProceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
1638–1649. ACL.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin
Choi. 2019. The curious case of neural text degen-
eration. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations .
Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan
Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Ji-
quan Ngiam, Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, et al. 2019.
Gpipe: Efﬁcient training of giant neural networks
using pipeline parallelism. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 103–112.
Samuel Humeau, Kurt Shuster, Marie-Anne Lachaux,
and Jason Weston. 2019. Poly-encoders: Architec-
tures and pre-training strategies for fast and accurate
multi-sentence scoring. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations .
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan,
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Scaling laws for neural language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 .
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R
Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
2019. CTRL: A conditional transformer language
model for controllable generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.05858 .
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 .
Nikita Kitaev, Łukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya.
2020. Reformer: The efﬁcient transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.04451 .
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2019. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence
pre-training for natural language generation, trans-
lation, and comprehension. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.13461 .Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Georgios P
Spithourakis, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2016.
A persona-based neural conversation model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.06155 .
Margaret Li, Stephen Roller, Ilia Kulikov, Sean
Welleck, Y-Lan Boureau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ja-
son Weston. 2019a. Don’t say that! making incon-
sistent dialogue unlikely with unlikelihood training.
arXiv preprint arxiv:1911.03860 .
Margaret Li, Jason Weston, and Stephen Roller. 2019b.
ACUTE-EV AL: Improved dialogue evaluation with
optimized questions and multi-turn comparisons. In
NeurIPS workshop on Conversational AI .
Zhuohan Li, Eric Wallace, Sheng Shen, Kevin Lin,
Kurt Keutzer, Dan Klein, and Joseph E Gonzalez.
2020. Train large, then compress: Rethinking model
size for efﬁcient training and inference of transform-
ers.arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11794 .
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
and Luke Zettlemoyerand Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
Luca Massarelli, Fabio Petroni, Aleksandra Piktus,
Myle Ott, Tim Rocktäschel, Vassilis Plachouras,
Fabrizio Silvestri, and Sebastian Riedel. 2019. How
decoding strategies affect the veriﬁability of gener-
ated text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03587 .
Nitika Mathur, Timothy Baldwin, and Trevor Cohn.
2017. Sequence effects in crowdsourced annota-
tions. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 2860–2865.
Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Samuel Humeau, Martin
Raison, and Antoine Bordes. 2018. Training mil-
lions of personalized dialogue agents. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pages 2775–2779,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Paulius Micikevicius, Sharan Narang, Jonah Alben,
Gregory Diamos, Erich Elsen, David Garcia, Boris
Ginsburg, Michael Houston, Oleksii Kuchaiev,
Ganesh Venkatesh, et al. 2017. Mixed precision
training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.03740 .
Alexander Miller, Will Feng, Dhruv Batra, Antoine
Bordes, Adam Fisch, Jiasen Lu, Devi Parikh, and
Jason Weston. 2017. ParlAI: A dialog research soft-
ware platform. In Proceedings of the 2017 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 79–84.
ACL.
Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, Alexei Baevski, Angela
Fan, Sam Gross, Nathan Ng, David Grangier, and
Michael Auli. 2019. fairseq: A fast, extensi-
ble toolkit for sequence modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.01038 .
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
2017. A deep reinforced model for abstractive sum-
marization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304 .
Shrimai Prabhumoye, Margaret Li, Jack Urbanek,
Emily Dinan, Douwe Kiela, Jason Weston, and
Arthur Szlam. 2020. I love your chain mail! mak-
ing knights smile in a fantasy game world. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.02878 .
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
Blog , 1(8).
Jack W. Rae, Anna Potapenko, Siddhant M. Jayaku-
mar, Chloe Hillier, and Timothy P. Lillicrap. 2020.
Compressive transformers for long-range sequence
modelling. In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations .
Hannah Rashkin, Eric Michael Smith, Margaret Li, and
Y-Lan Boureau. 2019. Towards empathetic open-
domain conversation models: A new benchmark and
dataset. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 5370–5381, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Pararth Shah, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Bing Liu, and
Gokhan Tür. 2018a. Bootstrapping a neural conver-
sational agent with dialogue self-play, crowdsourc-
ing and on-line reinforcement learning. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
3 (Industry Papers) , pages 41–51, New Orleans -
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Pararth Shah, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan Tür, Ab-
hinav Rastogi, Ankur Bapna, Neha Nayak, and
Larry Heck. 2018b. Building a conversational agent
overnight with dialogue self-play. arXiv preprint
arxiv:1801.04871 .
Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. 2018. Adafactor:
Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04235 .
Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri,
Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catan-
zaro. 2019. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion
parameter language models using gpu model paral-
lelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 .
Heung-yeung Shum, Xiao-dong He, and Di Li. 2018.
From Eliza to XiaoIce: challenges and opportunities
with social chatbots. Frontiers of Information Tech-
nology & Electronic Engineering , 19(1):10–26.Kurt Shuster, Da Ju, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Y-
Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2019. The di-
alogue dodecathlon: Open-domain knowledge and
image grounded conversational agents.
Eric Smith, Mary Williamson, Kurt Shuster, Jason We-
ston, and Y-Lan Boureau. 2020. Can you put it all
together: Evaluating conversational agents’ ability
to blend skills. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics . ACL.
Jack Urbanek, Angela Fan, Siddharth Karamcheti,
Saachi Jain, Samuel Humeau, Emily Dinan, Tim
Rocktäschel, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, and Ja-
son Weston. 2019. Learning to speak and act in
a fantasy text adventure game. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 673–683, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , pages 5998–6008.
Wei Wei, Quoc V . Le, Andrew M. Dai, and Li-Jia Li.
2018. A goal-oriented neural conversation model by
self-play.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Di-
nan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston. 2020. Neu-
ral text generation with unlikelihood training. In
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions .
Jason Weston, Emily Dinan, and Alexander Miller.
2018. Retrieve and reﬁne: Improved sequence gen-
eration models for dialogue. In Proceedings of the
2018 EMNLP Workshop SCAI: The 2nd Interna-
tional Workshop on Search-Oriented Conversational
AI, pages 87–92, Brussels, Belgium. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jason E Weston. 2016. Dialog-based language learn-
ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 829–837.
Thomas Wolf, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, and
Clement Delangue. 2019. TransferTransfo: A trans-
fer learning approach for neural network based con-
versational agents. In NeurIPS Workshop on Con-
versational AI .
Yinfei Yang, Steve Yuan, Daniel Cer, Sheng-yi Kong,
Noah Constant, Petr Pilar, Heming Ge, Yun-Hsuan
Sung, Brian Strope, and Ray Kurzweil. 2018. Learn-
ing semantic textual similarity from conversations.
InProceedings of The Third Workshop on Repre-
sentation Learning for NLP , pages 164–174, Mel-
bourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur
Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Per-
sonalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you
have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 2204–2213. ACL.
Yizhe Zhang, Siqi Sun, Michel Galley, Yen-Chun Chen,
Chris Brockett, Xiang Gao, Jianfeng Gao, Jingjing
Liu, and Bill Dolan. 2019. DialoGPT: Large-scale
generative pre-training for conversational response
generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00536 .
Li Zhou, Jianfeng Gao, Di Li, and Heung-Yeung Shum.
2020. The design and implementation of XiaoIce,
an empathetic social chatbot. Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 1–62.