Title: Analyzing Dynamic Adversarial Training Data in the Limit

Analyzing Dynamic Adversarial Training Data in the Limit
Eric Wallace1Adina Williams2yRobin Jia2;3yDouwe Kiela2y
1University of California, Berkeley2Facebook AI Research3University of Southern California
ericwallace@berkeley.edu dkiela@fb.com
Abstract
To create models that are robust across a wide
range of test inputs, training datasets should
include diverse examples that span numerous
phenomena. Dynamic adversarial data collec-
tion (DADC), where annotators craft examples
that challenge continually improving models,
holds promise as an approach for generating
such diverse training sets. Prior work has
shown that running DADC over 1–3 rounds
can help models ﬁx some error types, but it
does not necessarily lead to better generaliza-
tion beyond adversarial test data. We argue
that running DADC over many rounds maxi-
mizes its training-time beneﬁts, as the differ-
ent rounds can together cover many of the
task-relevant phenomena. We present the ﬁrst
study of longer-term DADC, where we collect
20 rounds of NLI examples for a small set of
premise paragraphs, with both adversarial and
non-adversarial approaches. Models trained
on DADC examples make 26% fewer errors on
our expert-curated test set compared to mod-
els trained on non-adversarial data. Our analy-
sis shows that DADC yields examples that are
more difﬁcult, more lexically and syntactically
diverse, and contain fewer annotation artifacts
compared to non-adversarial examples.
1 Introduction
Traditional crowdsourcing methods often yield
datasets that lack diversity, contain spurious cor-
relations, and are easy for existing models (Guru-
rangan et al., 2018; Poliak et al., 2018; Geva et al.,
2019; Ko et al., 2020; Potts et al., 2021). Training
on such examples can lead to models that reach
deceptively high accuracy on in-distribution test
data, yet fail on challenge sets (Naik et al., 2018;
Glockner et al., 2018; Gardner et al., 2020), input
perturbations (Wallace et al., 2019; Kaushik et al.,
2020), and distribution shifts (Talmor and Berant,
2019; Hendrycks et al., 2020).
Work done while an intern at Facebook AI Research.
yEqual contribution
0 5 10 15 20
After Training on N Rounds708090T est Accuracy (%)
Human Accuracy
Data Collection Method
Non-Adversarial
Static Adversarial
Dynamic AdversarialFigure 1: Model accuracy on our expert-curated test
setwhen training on data collected from three differ-
ent methods. Standard non-adversarial data collection
is more effective than adversarial data collection in the
short-term. However, in the long term, adversarial data
collection statistically signiﬁcantly outperforms stan-
dard data, especially when the data is collected using
a dynamic model that is updated after each round.
Dynamic adversarial data collection (DADC)
holds promise as an approach to mitigate these
training set problems. In DADC, humans are tasked
with creating examples that fool state-of-the-art
models but are answerable by humans. Crucially,
DADC is dynamic in that data collection is repeated
over many rounds with a stream of ever-improving
models-in-the-loop. As models improve, annota-
tors are incentivized to craft new types of examples
that challenge the latest models. In the limit, this
process would ideally cover most task-relevant phe-
nomena, leading to more robust models.
Whether DADC actually leads to diverse, high-
coverage training data, however, has remained un-
clear. It could cause annotators to write unnatural
examples or to focus on a narrow subset of unusualarXiv:2110.08514v2  [cs.CL]  26 Sep 2022
examples that models ﬁnd difﬁcult to learn, thus de-
creasing data diversity (Bowman and Dahl, 2021).
Some prior work has shown that a few rounds of
DADC can indeed improve robustness to adversar-
ial inputs (Dinan et al., 2019; Nie et al., 2020a),
however, there are mixed results on improving ac-
curacy on other distributions (Kaushik et al., 2021).
To date, no study has analyzed how DADC evolves
over many rounds. Thus, the long-term beneﬁts or
drawbacks of adopting it as a core dataset creation
paradigm remain poorly understood.
In this work, we conduct the ﬁrst study of
DADC’s effects in the long term, where we conduct
many rounds and rapidly update models. We focus
on the task of natural language inference (NLI),
which serves as a crucial benchmark for research
on language understanding (Bowman et al., 2015;
Williams et al., 2018a). To make our study feasible,
we conduct intensive data collection on a small set
of context passages that span different genres and
exhibit numerous natural language phenomena. By
using a small set of contexts, we create a scenario
in which models can improve quickly from round
to round, thus approximating the dynamics of run-
ning DADC at a larger scale. We compare three
approaches for collecting training data—no model,
static model-in-the-loop, and dynamic model-in-
the-loop—in a controlled setting for 20 rounds.
To evaluate the different methods, we collect
expert-curated non-adversarial test examples for
each context that span numerous NLI phenomena
which humans can handle correctly. On this test
set, DADC outperforms the alternative approaches
after many rounds of data collection (e.g., Fig-
ure 1). Standard non-adversarial data collection
causes model accuracy to climb quickly for a short
period of time, but accuracy quickly plateaus after
more examples are collected. On the other hand,
DADC examples yield larger improvements for
later rounds. To understand these results, we show
that DADC examples are overall more diverse in
lexical and syntactic patterns, contain fewer arti-
facts, and become more difﬁcult over each round.
Overall, our results show that building large adver-
sarial training sets may be more useful than stan-
dard model-agnostic collection in the long term.
2 Background
Collecting Data with Crowdsourcing. Most
large-scale supervised datasets are collected using
crowd workers (Bowman et al., 2015; Rajpurkaret al., 2016; Ko ˇciský et al., 2018). Compared to
experts, crowd workers often produce lower qual-
ity data as they are not necessarily well-trained for
one’s task and can be apathetic to the goals of the
research (Snow et al., 2008; Gadiraju et al., 2017).
These data quality issues are exacerbated for lan-
guage tasks because crowd workers also need to
write inputs, e.g., writing hypothesis sentences for
natural language inference tasks. These manually-
written inputs often follow a very narrow distribu-
tion: they lack diversity over lexical items, syntac-
tic patterns, domains, example difﬁculties, reason-
ing types, and more (Yang et al., 2018; Gururangan
et al., 2018; Geva et al., 2019; Min et al., 2019;
Kiela et al., 2021).
Dynamic Adversarial Data Collection. In
DADC, workers are tasked with writing examples
that are answerable by humans but fool existing
models (Wallace et al., 2019; Nie et al., 2020a;
Kiela et al., 2021). Concretely, workers are pre-
sented with a user interface where they can ob-
serve model predictions and interactively build data
that exposes model failures. Multiple rounds may
also be conducted, where the model is updated on
the adversarial data collected thus far and rede-
ployed; the goal of this is to encourage workers
to write increasingly more difﬁcult examples. Ad-
versarial data collection has been widely adopted
in recent work, especially for building evaluation
datasets (Dua et al., 2019; Nie et al., 2020a; Di-
nan et al., 2019; Bartolo et al., 2020; Potts et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2021; Kaushik et al., 2021; Xu
et al., 2020, 2021). Our focus is instead on training ,
where past work has shown that after a few rounds
of adversarial data, a model noticeably improves on
its errors, yet many problems still remain (Nie et al.,
2020a; Bartolo et al., 2020; Kaushik et al., 2021;
Zellers et al., 2019). Moreover, it remains unclear
whether collecting adversarial or non-adversarial
data leads to generally more robust models in the
long term (Kaushik et al., 2021).
3 Dynamic Data Collection in the Limit
The paradigm of DADC raises a natural but unan-
swered question: what would happen if we kept
going? If we ran DADC for many years, how ro-
bust would the resulting models be? Would models
improve more quickly than if we had collected
training data without a model-in-the-loop?
Answering these forward-looking questions is
key to understanding whether researchers and prac-
Premise Model Rd Hypotheses Label Error
SoundNo 20 Old telephones have sheepskin over a cup or cylinder. Entail -
Static 20 Parts of animal anatomy can function as the origins of sound. Entail 7
Dynamic 20 The transmission due to the vibration can be attenuated with distances. Entail 3
YellowNo 20 Ruiz’s experiment was on three men. Contradict -
Static 20 It turned out that basset hounds were immune to yellow fever. Contradict 3
Dynamic 20 The American Public Health Association meeting, held in October
1900, was about developing vaccines against yellow fever.Contradict 7
FaradayNo 20 michael faraday’s mother was named margaret Entail -
Static 20 The home of the Faradays, in London, was very crowded. Entail 7
Dynamic 20 Michael had at least nine uncles and/or aunts. Entail 3
Table 1: Examples from the training sets that are generated by crowd workers, with No,Static , orDynamic models
in the loop. The error column shows whether the worker successfully fooled the model in the loop when submitting
the example in the user interface. See Table 5 for the full premise paragraphs.
titioners should continue to collect data in an ad-
versarial fashion. Of course, we cannot practically
run many years of data collection at once due to
cost and time constraints. Our key idea is to instead
answer these questions for a more manageable test
bed that still retains many of the key challenges
associated with language understanding tasks. In
particular, we scale down the natural language in-
ference (NLI) task to a small number of paragraph-
length premises. In this setting, many rounds of
smaller-scale data collection can tell us whether
DADC or non-adversarial data collection leads to
more robust model accuracy on test hypotheses
for these same contexts. If DADC is indeed supe-
rior, this suggests that DADC can collect data that
more effectively covers the challenging phenom-
ena required for NLI, and therefore scaling it up to
(many) more contexts could yield models that are
similarly robust for more general NLI.
3.1 Task and Context Paragraphs
We choose to focus on NLI, a canonical and well-
studied natural language understanding task (Da-
gan et al., 2005; Bos and Markert, 2005; Giampic-
colo et al., 2007; MacCartney and Manning, 2009).
NLI training datasets are notorious for being rife
with artifacts and biases (Poliak et al., 2018; Guru-
rangan et al., 2018; Tsuchiya, 2018; McCoy et al.,
2019), which makes NLI a suitable test bed for
studying questions surrounding training dataset
quality. Using NLI also enables us to write a rich
and diverse test set with a small number of con-
texts because each premise admits many possible
hypotheses. We focus on binary NLI—deﬁnitely
entailing or not entailing—to minimize labeling dis-
agreements stemming from the distinction between
neutral and contradiction in three-way NLI (Pavlickand Kwiatkowski, 2019; Nie et al., 2020b).
We use ten diverse paragraphs from Project
Gutenberg1as the premises—each one is chosen to
elicit many possible hypotheses. We choose these
paragraphs to span a range of genres (scientiﬁc, bio-
graphical, historical, narrative) and present a differ-
ent set of challenges. For instance, some passages
describe physical objects in detail, requiring com-
monsense understanding of the physical world (e.g.,
“. . . Phonny had not measured his wires in respect to
length, but had cut them off of various lengths, tak-
ing care however not to have any of them too short.
The result was that the ends of the wires projected
to various distances above the board. . . ” ). Other
passages describe reasoning about uncertainty (e.g.,
“. . . this negative result might be because these ani-
mals are not susceptible to the disease. . . ” ) or hy-
pothetical events (e.g., “. . . If there should be even
partial cooperation between the Austrian leaders,
he must retreat . . . ” ). See Appendix A for the full
premise paragraphs. We minimally edit each para-
graph so that they can be read standalone, e.g., we
resolve coreferences.
3.2 Data Collection Procedure
We collect data over many rounds, where each
round comprises three steps. First, crowdworkers
write hypothesis sentences that are either entailed
or not entailed by one of our premises while inter-
acting with the current model-in-the-loop. Second,
other crowdworkers relabel these examples and
help ﬁlter out spam and other malformed examples.
Finally, we update the model-in-the-loop by ﬁne-
tuning on all collected data, including data from
the newest round. We use Amazon Mechanical
1https://www.gutenberg.org/
Turk (AMT) for data collection.
Hypothesis Generation. To generate hypothe-
ses, we run AMT tasks where a worker is randomly
provided one of the premises and is asked to write
ten different hypotheses. After writing each hy-
pothesis, they are shown the predictions of a live
model in the loop. To encourage workers to write
model-fooling examples, they are given a bonus ev-
ery time one of their examples fools the model and
passes the later label veriﬁcation step. We ask work-
ers to write ten hypotheses for a single premise, as
this allows them to better understand the model’s
behavior and empirically leads to more-difﬁcult
examples (Section 4). The worker can generate
hypotheses for either of the binary labels, but we
encourage them to generate balanced examples in
the onboarding instructions. The user interface is
shown in Appendix B.
Label Veriﬁcation. To ensure the generated hy-
potheses are labeled correctly, we run a separate
AMT task where workers are asked to label each
example without being shown the original label.
Each example is labeled by at least three workers.
If all three agree, that example is saved. If there is
a disagreement, we ask two additional workers and
keep the example if four out of ﬁve agree on the la-
bel. We also provide an option to ﬂag a hypothesis
as “bad”, e.g., it is very ungrammatical or clearly
spam. If more than one worker ﬂags an example
as bad, we remove it. We do not allow workers to
participate in both the labeling and validation AMT
tasks, as we do not want workers to be inﬂuenced
by one another’s hypotheses.
Updating the Model. For the initial round of
data collection, we use as our starting point a
RoBERTa-large model (Liu et al., 2019) that has
been ﬁnetuned on SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015),
MNLI (Williams et al., 2018a), and FEVER-
NLI (Nie et al., 2019).We use this training data
as it provides us with an accurate initial model,
and note that we collapse the neutral and contradic-
tion labels during training as we focus on binary
NLI. To update the model after each round, we
continue ﬁnetuning it on all of the data collected
thus far and then deploy it for the next round. Our
ﬁnetuning hyperparameters follow the recommen-
dations of Mosbach et al. (2021): we use a learning
rate of 210 5, a learning rate warmup over the
ﬁrst 10% of steps, bias-corrected Adam, and 15
epochs of training. We early stop using held-outvalidation data (see Section 3.3). We refer to this
setting, where crowdworkers interact with a model-
in-the-loop that is updated after each round, as the
Dynamic Model setting.
Baselines. In addition to the above, we also col-
lect data with two baseline approaches:
•No Model. This is the typical procedure for
collecting training data where workers do not
interact with a model.
•Static Model. We provide a model in the loop
to the workers but the model is kept ﬁxed across
all the rounds. We use the same model that the
Dynamic Model setting uses in its ﬁrst round.
No data is mixed between methods and workers
can not participate in multiple methods.
3.3 Dataset Details
Our codebase is built on top of the Dynabench
platform (Kiela et al., 2021), we deploy tasks us-
ing the Mephisto library,2and we serve models
using Dynalab (Ma et al., 2021). We restrict our
AMT workers to those that speak English, have
completed at least 100 tasks on AMT, and have an
approval rating of at least 97%. To qualify for the
task, a worker must also pass an onboarding proce-
dure where they are tasked with correctly labeling
ﬁve NLI examples in a row.
For each data collection method, we run 20
rounds of data collection. We stop at 20 rounds as
model performance on our validation sets begins to
saturate. We collect 550 examples per round before
label veriﬁcation, with an equal distribution over
the ten premises. All the data collection methods
are run in parallel at the same time of day to control
for the effects of time on data quality (Karpinska
et al., 2021). At this scale, we are able to complete
each round of data collection for all three methods
in approximately 24 hours. We hold out 50 exam-
ples from each round to use for early stopping and
for reporting validation metrics.
Table 2 shows overall statistics of our ﬁnal
datasets. These statistics are similar across the
three datasets, including the label balance, the rate
at which examples are discarded, and the number
of AMT workers. However, the datasets differ in
the rate at which workers fooled the models in the
loop; Figure 2 shows that the fooling rate is rela-
tively constant for the static model but goes down
for the dynamic model as the model is updated.
2https://github.com/facebookresearch/mephisto
No
ModelStatic
ModelDynamic
Model
# Rounds 20 20 20
# Hypo. 11,000 11,000 11,000
# Veriﬁed Hypo. 7,684 7,102 6,911
# Workers 115 104 121
% Contradiction 58.5 56.3 54.6
Table 2: Statistics of our datasets. For each method,
we independently run 20 rounds of data collection with
550 hypotheses per round. We verify the labels of each
hypothesis using additional crowd workers and discard
any low-agreement examples; the adversarial data is
discarded slightly more often. The datasets are roughly
balanced between entailment and contradiction.
Table 1 shows qualitative examples of training hy-
potheses from each method. We release our data
and models.3
3.4 Expert-Curated Test Set
Kaushik et al. (2021) compared standard data col-
lection to a single round of adversarial data col-
lection, ﬁnding that adversarial training data im-
proves accuracy only on adversarially-constructed
test datasets but not on others. We hypothesize
that running DADC for many rounds can overcome
this limitation and improve generalization to inde-
pendent, non-adversarial test data. To test this, we
built an expert-curated test set for our ten premise
paragraphs that is intended to be challenging but
not necessarily adversarial to models. We (three of
the authors) wrote 680 NLI examples, and we re-
cruited ﬁve researchers who have published in NLI
and spurious correlations to write an additional 320
examples. The test set spans different challenges,
syntactic patterns, and reasoning types, loosely in-
spired by the categorizations from Williams et al.
2020. The examples are not written with a model
in the loop, they are balanced across the labels, and
they are equally distributed over the premises. Ex-
amples are shown in Table 3.
We also collect crowd worker labels for our test
set to ensure that the labels are unambiguous and
to measure human accuracy. First, we collect 15
labels for each example. We remove any example
from the test set where 9 or fewer workers chose
the correct label; this removed 21 examples. Sec-
ond, we collect an additional 5 labels to use for
estimating human accuracy. The average accuracy
is93.2% when using each label individually.
3https://github.com/facebookresearch/dadc-limit
0 5 10 15 20
Round010203040506070Fooling Rate (%)
Data Collection Method
Static Adversarial
Dynamic AdversarialFigure 2: Model fooling rates. We show how often
crowd workers write examples that are successfully an-
swered by humans but fool the model they interact with.
For the static model, the fooling rate is relatively con-
stant as the model is kept ﬁxed (the variance across
rounds is due to different crowd workers having differ-
ent fooling rates). For the dynamic model, the fooling
rate goes down over time as the model is updated.
4 Dynamic Adversarial Data
Outperforms Non-Adversarial Data
Here, we show that DADC outperforms both stan-
dard and static adversarial data collection in the
long term. In particular, we train various models
using the three different datasets and compare them
on the validation and expert-curated test sets.
4.1 Training Final Models
For each dataset, we train 20 models—one for each
round—on all of the training data up to and includ-
ing a given round. All models start with the same
RoBERTa-large model that was used for round one
of adversarial data collection. We then continue
ﬁnetuning this model on the associated training
data using the hyperparameters from Section 3.2.
Moreover, to measure possible variance across dif-
ferent ﬁnetuning runs, we train each model with
ﬁve different random seeds.
4.2 Main Results
Figure 1 shows our models’ accuracy on the expert
test set described in Section 3.4. In the short term,
standard non-adversarial data collection performs
best—it has the highest accuracy after the ﬁrst four
rounds. However, in the long term, adversarial
data collection, especially when done dynamically,
leads to the highest accuracy by a noticeable mar-
gin. We run McNemar’s statistical test to compute
Premise Hypotheses Label
SoundThe head of a drum and the strings of a piano are similar in that they both vibrate. Entailment
A piano produces sound because the keys vibrate when they are struck by the pianist. Contradiction
YellowThe speaker only ran one experiment of injecting yellow fever blood into animals. Contradiction
Dr. Daniel Cruz took blood from a sick patient to run his experiment. Entailment
FaradayMichael Faraday’s wife was named Margaret Hastwell. Contradiction
Yorkshire is a less populous locality to be from then Manchester Square. Entailment
Table 3: Examples from our expert-curated test set. See Table 5 for the premise paragraphs.
0 5 10 15 20
After Training on N Rounds708090Average Val Acc (%)
Data Collection Method
Non-Adversarial
Static Adversarial
Dynamic Adversarial
Figure 3: Combined validation accuracy . We create a
validation set by pooling together validation data from
each data collection method. We ﬁnd the same trend as
the expert-curated test set—dynamic adversarial data
performs best in the long term.
whether the results are signiﬁcantly different for the
ﬁnal round 20 models: the DADC model outper-
forms the static adversarial model with p < 0:05
and the non-adversarial model with p < 0:01;
the static adversarial model outperforms the non-
adversarial model with p <0:05.
We also evaluate models on validation data that
is split off from each round of each data collection
method. Figure 3 shows results on a validation
set that is created by pooling validation data from
all three collection methods; we observe the same
trends as our test set, although the accuracies are
slightly higher on average.
Overall, these results show that when building
training sets in our setting, adversarial data is not
necessarily preferred when the number of examples
is small. On the contrary, when the number of
training examples and rounds is large, using DADC
leads to more robust, broader coverage models.Costs of DADC. DADC examples are more expen-
sive to collect as it takes crowd workers longer on
average to write and verify them. However, DADC
examples provide more “bang for your buck”—it is
more cost-effective to collect few DADC examples
compared to many regular examples. This can be
seen from Figure 1 while accounting for DADC
being approximately two times more expensive per
example than non-adversarial data.
Comparison to Humans. Even though the round
20 models have approximately 700 training ex-
amples for each premise, they are still noticeably
worse than human accuracy. In particular, the best
DADC model reaches 84.4% accuracy, whereas
human accuracy is 93.2%. This shows that while
DADC does lead to better models, we are still far
from creating NLP systems that perform robust
NLI on our premise paragraphs.
Generalization of DADC Data Across Models.
One possible concern with adversarially-collected
data is that it could be too model-speciﬁc, simi-
lar to datasets built with active learning (Lowell
et al., 2019). To test whether the DADC data can
generalize to other (newer) models, we train an
ALBERT XXLarge-v2 model (Lan et al., 2020) on
SNLI, MNLI, and FeverNLI. We then ﬁnetune the
model on the data from all 20 rounds for each of
our three datasets. The model has an accuracy of
69.1% before updating on our collected data, and
it reaches an accuracy of 83.1%, 84.6%, and 85.8%
on the no model, static model, and dynamic model
datasets, respectively. This shows that our DADC
data does generalize to better models—it leads to
the highest accuracy among the three datasets—but
the gap from DADC to static adversarial data is
smaller than one from our RoBERTa model.
Generalization Beyond Our Premises. Since the
DADC data is more difﬁcult than typical crowd-
sourced data, it may promote models to learn more
robust NLI features. To evaluate this, we test our
round 20 models on out-of-distribution datasets, in-
cluding HANS (McCoy et al., 2019) and the MNLI
mismatched test set (Williams et al., 2018b). We
convert both test sets to binary classiﬁcation by
collapsing the neutral and contradiction labels. We
found that the round 20 models from all three set-
tings, as well as our initial model trained on SNLI,
MNLI, and FEVER-NLI, reached comparable accu-
racies on these test sets. This shows that while the
DADC data does lead to improved in-distribution
test performance, it does not necessarily lead to
better performance under distribution shift.
5 Analyzing Adversarial Data
Why is dynamic adversarial data superior to stan-
dard data in the long term? In Table 4, we re-
port summary statistics about our three collected
datasets. We ﬁnd that dynamic adversarial data is
more diverse, has higher complexity, and contains
fewer artifacts than non-adversarial data. These
ﬁndings agree with our intuition surrounding ad-
versarial datasets: small adversarial training sets
that contain diverse and challenging examples may
be hard for models to learn from. However, larger
datasets of this type will ultimately lead to more
accurate and robust models in the long term. We
describe our analyses in detail below.4
Diversity. DADC data is more diverse at both the
lexical (unigram and bigram) and example levels
(Table 4, top). To measure lexical diversity, we
count the number of unique unigrams and bigrams
in the dataset. To measure example-level diversity,
we iterate through each training example and ﬁnd
the most similar other training sample according to
BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002). We then report
the average of these BLEU scores similarities; the
dynamic adversarial examples are the least similar
to one another.5The difference in inter-example
similarity between the DADC data and the static
adversarial data is signiﬁcant with p < 0:01ac-
cording to a t-test.
Syntax and Sentence Complexity. The dy-
namic adversarial data is more complex (Ta-
4Note that when computing each metric, we use a version
of the No Model and Static Model datasets that are randomly
downsampled to be the same size as the dynamic model data
(6,911 examples). This controls for any effect that dataset size
would have on our analyses.
5Note that this diversity metric is effective because we
collect hundreds of examples for a single context paragraph;
otherwise, we would need to measure similarity between hy-
potheses for different premises, a more complicated problem.
We also experimented with BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019)
and found similar trends as BLEU score.No
ModelStatic
ModelDynamic
Model
Diversity
Unique Unigrams 4.0k 4.2k 4.3k
Unique Bigrams 23.3k 24.8k 25.6k
Inter-example Sim. 41.2 41.9 39.5
Complexity
Syntax 2.0 2.1 2.3
Reading Level 4.9 5.4 5.9
Length 10.1 10.9 12.1
Artifacts
Hypo-only Acc % 75.4 69.3 69.7
Overlap Entail % 54.2 49.2 47.3
Table 4: Dataset analysis. The hypotheses generated
by DADC are more diverse based on the number of lex-
ical items and inter-example similarity. The hypotheses
are also more complex, as shown by their increased syn-
tactic complexity, reading level, and lengths. Finally,
adversarial data contains fewer instances of known arti-
facts. We bold the best result—lower is better for inter-
example similarity and the artifact analyses.
ble 4, middle). For each hypothesis, we measure
its length in words, its Flesch-Kincaid readabil-
ity (Flesch, 1948), and its syntactic complexity
using Yngve scores (Yngve, 1960; Roark et al.,
2007). Yngve scores roughly measure the devia-
tion of a parse tree from a purely right-branching
tree—it is the average number of left branches on
the path from the root node to each word. To com-
pute Yngve scores, we parse sentences using the
Benepar parser (Kitaev and Klein, 2018) based on
T5 small (Raffel et al., 2020). In all three met-
rics, the dynamic adversarial data scores highest,
and it is statistically signiﬁcantly higher than the
static model data based on a t-test with p < 0:05.
We also show how the syntactic complexity evolves
over the rounds in Figure 4. For the non-adversarial
and static adversarial data, the syntactic complexity
is relatively constant while the DADC examples
become increasingly more complex.
Fewer Artifacts. NLI training datasets are
known to suffer from spurious correlations. The
DADC examples contain fewer instances of two
known artifacts: hypothesis-only information (Po-
liak et al., 2018; Gururangan et al., 2018; Tsuchiya,
2018) and high-overlap entailment examples (Mc-
Coy et al., 2019). To measure such artifacts, we
ﬁrst train a hypothesis-only model on the training
set for each dataset using RoBERTa large. We test
1 5 10 15 20
Data Collected in Round N2.02.252.5Yngve Scores
Data Collection Method
Non-Adversarial
Static Adversarial
Dynamic AdversarialFigure 4: Complexity of syntax over time. We show
how the average syntactic complexity changes over
each round. For the non-adversarial and static adversar-
ial data, the syntactic complexity is relatively constant
across rounds. On the other hand, the DADC examples
become increasingly more complex as annotators are
faced with ever-improving models in the loop.
on validation data split off from each respective
training set, which allows us to measure how much
hypothesis-only information is present within each
dataset. The static adversarial and dynamic ad-
versarial datasets have the lowest hypothesis-only
accuracy. To measure high-overlap entailment in-
stances, we ﬁnd examples where the hypothesis has
high (>90%) word overlap with the premise and
compute how often the label is entailment. Such
examples appear less frequently in DADC data.
6 Related Work
Post-hoc Adversarial Filtering. In adversarial ﬁl-
tering (Le Bras et al., 2020; Zellers et al., 2018),
one takes an existing dataset and trains a model on
the most difﬁcult subportion of the data. Adver-
sarial ﬁltering shares motivations with adversarial
data collection—difﬁcult examples are more infor-
mative for learning—but it is focused on post-hoc
data ﬁltering rather than collection of new data.
Adversarial Training. Rather than having hu-
mans craft adversarial inputs, past work automati-
cally generates adversarial examples and trains on
them (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Ribeiro et al., 2018;
Ebrahimi et al., 2018). The main downside of such
approaches is their limited diversity—they focus
on speciﬁc aspects like paraphrase (Ribeiro et al.,
2018) or syntax (Iyyer et al., 2018) whereas DADCexamples are only limited by human creativity.
Active Learning. Active learning (Lewis and
Gale, 1994), especially when performed using
an uncertainty-based acquisition function, is also
closely related to DADC. The key differences are
in the setup: active learning assumes access to
unlabeled inputs, whereas in our setting we are
interested in building datasets from scratch.
Other Data Quality Improvements. Aside from
adversarial data collection, researchers have ex-
plored numerous methods for improving data qual-
ity when using crowdsourcing. This includes feed-
back from experts (Parrish et al., 2021; Nangia
et al., 2021), gamifying the data collection pro-
cess (Yang et al., 2018; Eisenschlos et al., 2021), en-
couraging counterfactual examples (Kaushik et al.,
2020; Gardner et al., 2020), or providing prompts
that workers can edit (Bowman et al., 2020; Vania
et al., 2020). Many of the ideas from these methods
can be combined with adversarial data collection.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
We investigated dynamic adversarial data collec-
tion in the limit—over a large number of rounds
until model performance starts plateauing—and
demonstrated that data collected via this method is
more valuable for training than alternatives, both on
validation data and an expert-curated test set. We
analyzed the collected data, showing that DADC
yields examples that are more diverse, more com-
plex, and contain fewer annotation artifacts com-
pared to non-adversarial examples. Our results
show that when building large training sets for
training NLP models, data collected in an adversar-
ial fashion with a continually updating model-in-
the-loop can be more useful than standard model-
agnostic collection in the long term.
In future work, it is vital to conduct similar ex-
periments on different tasks, e.g., question answer-
ing and sentiment analysis, as well as on a larger
number of contexts for NLI. Such experiments can
provide insight into the generalizability of our ﬁnd-
ings. Moreover, given that a core beneﬁt of DADC
is promoting diversity and complexity of examples,
one could explore other diversity-promoting meth-
ods of data collection. Lastly, our DADC setup is
relatively simplistic in that we use a single target
model and provide no other guides to the annota-
tor; it would be interesting to provide generative
models, model interpretations, or other methods to
potentially further improve our DADC results.
Addressing Possible Ethical Concerns
The premises that we use are sourced from pub-
licly available sources and were vetted to ensure
they contained no overtly offensive content. As
described in main text, we designed our incentive
structure to ensure that crowdworkers were well
compensated (i.e., paid over minimum wage in the
U.S.). Our datasets focus on the English language
as it is spoken in the United States. They are not
collected for the purpose of designing NLP appli-
cations but to conduct a scientiﬁc study into col-
lecting data for training machine learning models.
We share our datasets to allow the community to
replicate our ﬁndings and do not foresee any risks
associated with the free use of this data.
Acknowledgements
We thank Max Bartolo, Yixin Nie, Tristan Thrush,
Pedro Rodriguez, and the other members of the
Dynabench team for their valuable feedback on our
crowdsourcing platform and paper. We also thank
Alicia Parrish, Max Bartolo, Jessy Lin, and Nelson
Liu for help annotating our test set.
References
Max Bartolo, Alastair Roberts, Johannes Welbl, Sebas-
tian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. 2020. Beat the
AI: Investigating adversarial human annotation for
reading comprehension. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics , 8:662–678.
Johan Bos and Katja Markert. 2005. Recognising tex-
tual entailment with logical inference. In Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , pages 628–635, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Samuel R. Bowman and George Dahl. 2021. What will
it take to ﬁx benchmarking in natural language un-
derstanding? In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies , pages 4843–4855, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Samuel R. Bowman, Jennimaria Palomaki, Livio Bal-
dini Soares, and Emily Pitler. 2020. New protocolsand negative results for textual entailment data col-
lection. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP) , pages 8203–8214, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The PASCAL recognising textual entail-
ment challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges,
Evaluating Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object
Classiﬁcation and Recognizing Textual Entailment,
First PASCAL Machine Learning Challenges Work-
shop, MLCW 2005, Southampton, UK, April 11-
13, 2005, Revised Selected Papers , volume 3944 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 177–190.
Springer.
Emily Dinan, Samuel Humeau, Bharath Chintagunta,
and Jason Weston. 2019. Build it break it ﬁx it for
dialogue safety: Robustness from adversarial human
attack. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
4537–4546, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel
Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. 2019.
DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark requir-
ing discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers) , pages 2368–2378, Min-
neapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Javid Ebrahimi, Anyi Rao, Daniel Lowd, and Dejing
Dou. 2018. HotFlip: White-box adversarial exam-
ples for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the
56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages
31–36, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Julian Eisenschlos, Bhuwan Dhingra, Jannis Bulian,
Benjamin Börschinger, and Jordan Boyd-Graber.
2021. Fool me twice: Entailment from Wikipedia
gamiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies , pages 352–365, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Rudolf Flesch. 1948. A new readability yardstick. In
Journal of Applied Psychology .
Ujwal Gadiraju, Besnik Fetahu, Ricardo Kawase,
Patrick Siehndel, and Stefan Dietze. 2017. Using
worker self-assessments for competence-based pre-
selection in crowdsourcing microtasks. In ACM
Transactions of Computer–Human Interaction .
Matt Gardner, Yoav Artzi, Victoria Basmov, Jonathan
Berant, Ben Bogin, Sihao Chen, Pradeep Dasigi,
Dheeru Dua, Yanai Elazar, Ananth Gottumukkala,
Nitish Gupta, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Gabriel Ilharco,
Daniel Khashabi, Kevin Lin, Jiangming Liu, Nel-
son F. Liu, Phoebe Mulcaire, Qiang Ning, Sameer
Singh, Noah A. Smith, Sanjay Subramanian, Reut
Tsarfaty, Eric Wallace, Ally Zhang, and Ben Zhou.
2020. Evaluating models’ local decision boundaries
via contrast sets. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages
1307–1323, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mor Geva, Yoav Goldberg, and Jonathan Berant. 2019.
Are we modeling the task or the annotator? an inves-
tigation of annotator bias in natural language under-
standing datasets. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP) , pages 1161–1166, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan,
and Bill Dolan. 2007. The third PASCAL recogniz-
ing textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of
the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment
and Paraphrasing , pages 1–9, Prague. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Max Glockner, Vered Shwartz, and Yoav Goldberg.
2018. Breaking NLI systems with sentences that re-
quire simple lexical inferences. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
pages 650–655, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian
Szegedy. 2014. Explaining and harnessing adversar-
ial examples. In ICLR .
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer
Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel Bowman, and Noah A.
Smith. 2018. Annotation artifacts in natural lan-
guage inference data. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) ,
pages 107–112, New Orleans, Louisiana. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Dan Hendrycks, Xiaoyuan Liu, Eric Wallace, Adam
Dziedzic, Rishabh Krishnan, and Dawn Song. 2020.
Pretrained transformers improve out-of-distribution
robustness. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2744–2751, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Mohit Iyyer, John Wieting, Kevin Gimpel, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Adversarial example generation
with syntactically controlled paraphrase networks.
InProceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1875–1885, New
Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Marzena Karpinska, Nader Akoury, and Mohit Iyyer.
2021. The perils of using Mechanical Turk to eval-
uate open-ended text generation. In Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 1265–1285, Online
and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard H. Hovy, and
Zachary Chase Lipton. 2020. Learning the differ-
ence that makes A difference with counterfactually-
augmented data. In 8th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenReview.net.
Divyansh Kaushik, Douwe Kiela, Zachary C. Lipton,
and Wen-tau Yih. 2021. On the efﬁcacy of adversar-
ial data collection for question answering: Results
from a large-scale randomized study. In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6618–6633,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Douwe Kiela, Max Bartolo, Yixin Nie, Divyansh
Kaushik, Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Bertie Vid-
gen, Grusha Prasad, Amanpreet Singh, Pratik Ring-
shia, Zhiyi Ma, Tristan Thrush, Sebastian Riedel,
Zeerak Waseem, Pontus Stenetorp, Robin Jia, Mo-
hit Bansal, Christopher Potts, and Adina Williams.
2021. Dynabench: Rethinking benchmarking in
NLP. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies , pages 4110–4124, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Nikita Kitaev and Dan Klein. 2018. Constituency pars-
ing with a self-attentive encoder. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 2676–2686, Melbourne, Australia. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Miyoung Ko, Jinhyuk Lee, Hyunjae Kim, Gangwoo
Kim, and Jaewoo Kang. 2020. Look at the ﬁrst
sentence: Position bias in question answering. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 1109–1121, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Tomáš Ko ˇciský, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom,
Chris Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gábor Melis, and
Edward Grefenstette. 2018. The NarrativeQA read-
ing comprehension challenge. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , 6:317–
328.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut.
2020. ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised
learning of language representations. In 8th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30,
2020 . OpenReview.net.
Ronan Le Bras, Swabha Swayamdipta, Chandra Bha-
gavatula, Rowan Zellers, Matthew Peters, Ashish
Sabharwal, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Adversarial ﬁl-
ters of dataset biases. In Proceedings of the 37th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event , volume 119 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages
1078–1088. PMLR.
David D Lewis and William A Gale. 1994. A sequen-
tial algorithm for training text classiﬁers. In SIGIR .
Tiffany Liu, A.J. Chavar, Minkyoung Kim, Adam Blu-
farb, and Rony Karadi. 2021. Sourcing training data
with amazon’s mechanical turk. New York Times .
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
David Lowell, Zachary C. Lipton, and Byron C. Wal-
lace. 2019. Practical obstacles to deploying active
learning. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
21–30, Hong Kong, China. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Zhiyi Ma, Kawin Ethayarajh, Tristan Thrush, Somya
Jain, Ledell Wu, Robin Jia, Christopher Potts, Ad-
ina Williams, and Douwe Kiela. 2021. Dynaboard:
An evaluation-as-a-service platform for holistic next-
generation benchmarking. In NeurIPS .
Bill MacCartney and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
An extended model of natural logic. In Proceed-
ings of the Eight International Conference on Com-
putational Semantics , pages 140–156, Tilburg, The
Netherlands. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019.
Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
heuristics in natural language inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , pages 3428–3448,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Sewon Min, Eric Wallace, Sameer Singh, Matt Gard-
ner, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2019. Compositional questions do not necessitate
multi-hop reasoning. In Proceedings of the 57th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 4249–4257, Florence, Italy. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.Marius Mosbach, Maksym Andriushchenko, and Diet-
rich Klakow. 2021. On the stability of ﬁne-tuning
BERT: misconceptions, explanations, and strong
baselines. In 9th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Aus-
tria, May 3-7, 2021 . OpenReview.net.
Aakanksha Naik, Abhilasha Ravichander, Norman
Sadeh, Carolyn Rose, and Graham Neubig. 2018.
Stress test evaluation for natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 27th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics , pages 2340–2353,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Nikita Nangia, Saku Sugawara, Harsh Trivedi, Alex
Warstadt, Clara Vania, and Samuel R. Bowman.
2021. What ingredients make for an effective crowd-
sourcing protocol for difﬁcult NLU data collection
tasks? In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 1221–1235, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yixin Nie, Haonan Chen, and Mohit Bansal. 2019.
Combining fact extraction and veriﬁcation with neu-
ral semantic matching networks. In The Thirty-
Third AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
AAAI 2019, The Thirty-First Innovative Applications
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2019,
The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Ad-
vances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2019, Hon-
olulu, Hawaii, USA, January 27 - February 1, 2019 ,
pages 6859–6866. AAAI Press.
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit
Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020a. Ad-
versarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 4885–4901, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Yixin Nie, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit Bansal. 2020b.
What can we learn from collective human opinions
on natural language inference data? In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
9131–9143, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 311–318, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Alicia Parrish, William Huang, Omar Agha, Soo-Hwan
Lee, Nikita Nangia, Alexia Warstadt, Karmanya Ag-
garwal, Emily Allaway, Tal Linzen, and Samuel R.
Bowman. 2021. Does putting a linguist in the loop
improve NLU data collection? In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2021 , pages 4886–4901, Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ellie Pavlick and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2019. Inherent
disagreements in human textual inferences. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 7:677–694.
Adam Poliak, Jason Naradowsky, Aparajita Haldar,
Rachel Rudinger, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018.
Hypothesis only baselines in natural language in-
ference. In Proceedings of the Seventh Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics ,
pages 180–191, New Orleans, Louisiana. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Christopher Potts, Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, and
Douwe Kiela. 2021. DynaSent: A dynamic bench-
mark for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2388–2404, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text trans-
former. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
21:140:1–140:67.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 2383–2392, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2018. Semantically equivalent adversar-
ial rules for debugging NLP models. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 856–865, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, and Kristy Holling-
shead. 2007. Syntactic complexity measures for
detecting mild cognitive impairment. In Biologi-
cal, translational, and clinical language processing ,
pages 1–8, Prague, Czech Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast – but is it good?
evaluating non-expert annotations for natural lan-
guage tasks. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 254–263, Honolulu, Hawaii. Association
for Computational Linguistics.Alon Talmor and Jonathan Berant. 2019. MultiQA: An
empirical investigation of generalization and trans-
fer in reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 4911–4921, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Masatoshi Tsuchiya. 2018. Performance impact
caused by hidden bias of training data for recog-
nizing textual entailment. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) , Miyazaki,
Japan. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).
Clara Vania, Ruijie Chen, and Samuel R. Bowman.
2020. Asking Crowdworkers to Write Entailment
Examples: The Best of Bad options. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st Conference of the Asia-Paciﬁc Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 10th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing , pages 672–686, Suzhou,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Eric Wallace, Pedro Rodriguez, Shi Feng, Ikuya Ya-
mada, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2019. Trick me
if you can: Human-in-the-loop generation of adver-
sarial examples for question answering. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 7:387–401.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018a. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018b. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Adina Williams, Tristan Thrush, and Douwe Kiela.
2020. ANLIzing the adversarial natural language in-
ference dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12729 .
Jing Xu, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Y-Lan Boureau, Ja-
son Weston, and Emily Dinan. 2020. Recipes for
safety in open-domain chatbots. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.07079 .
Jing Xu, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Y-Lan Boureau, Jason We-
ston, and Emily Dinan. 2021. Bot-adversarial dia-
logue for safe conversational agents. In Proceedings
of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies , pages 2950–2968,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhilin Yang, Saizheng Zhang, Jack Urbanek, Will
Feng, Alexander H Miller, Arthur Szlam, Douwe
Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Mastering the dun-
geon: Grounded language learning by mechanical
turker descent. In 6th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference
Track Proceedings . OpenReview.net.
Victor H. Yngve. 1960. A model and an hypothesis
for language structure. Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society , 104(5):444–466.
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Roy Schwartz, and
Yejin Choi. 2018. SWAG: A large-scale adversar-
ial dataset for grounded commonsense inference. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 93–
104, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali
Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2019. HellaSwag: Can
a machine really ﬁnish your sentence? In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4791–
4800, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. BERTScore:
Evaluating text generation with BERT. In 7th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR .
A Dataset Examples
Table 5 shows the ten paragraphs that are used as
the premises in our experiments.
B Mechanical Turk Interface
Figure 5 shows our Amazon Mechanical Turk in-
terface for the model-in-the-loop setting.
Premises
Sound is due to the vibrations of objects. A piano string produces sound because of its vibration when struck, or pulled to one side and then released.
This vibration sets the air in rapid motion, and the result is the recording of the sound on our ear-drums. In old telephones, this recording corresponds
to a ﬁlm of sheepskin or bladder drawn over a hollow cup or cylinder. When the head of a drum is struck with a small stick it vibrates. In this case
the vibrations are set in motion by the blow, while in the telephone a similar phenomenon is the result of vibratory waves falling from the voice on
the thin membrane, or disk of metal, in the transmitter. When these vibrations reach the ear-drumm the nervous system, corresponding to electricity
in the mechanical telephone, carries this sound to our brains where it is recorded and understood. In the telephone the wire, charged with electricity,
carries the sound from one place to another.
Michael Faraday was born at Newington, Surrey, on September 22, 1791, and was the third of four children. His father, James Faraday, was the
son of Robert and Elizabeth Faraday, of Clapham Wood Hall, in the north-west of Yorkshire, and was brought up as a blacksmith. He was the third
of ten children, and, in 1786, married Margaret Hastwell, a farmer’s daughter. Soon after his marriage he came to London, where Michael was
born. In 1796 James Faraday, with his family, moved from Newington, and took rooms over a coach-house in Jacob’s Well Mews, Charles Street,
Manchester Square. In looking at this humble abode one can scarcely help thinking that the Yorkshire blacksmith and his little family would have
been far happier in a country house than in their new crowded London one, however, had he remained in the countryside, it is difﬁcult to see how
the genius of young Michael could have met with the requisites for its development.
I had demonstrated by repeated experiments that inoculations of yellow fever blood into animals–dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs–gives a negative result.
However, this negative result might be because these animals are not susceptible to the disease. In the civil hospital in Vera Cruz in 1887, Dr. Daniel
Ruiz ran a single inoculation experiment on a man. But, this experiment was inconclusive because the patient from whom the blood was obtained
was in the eighth day of the disease, and it was quite possible that the speciﬁc germ was destoyed at that point. These were the facts surrounding
yellow fever when Dr. Reed and his associates commenced their investigations in Cuba during the summer of 1900. In a preliminary note read at the
meeting of the American Public Health Association, October 22, 1900, the board gave a report of three cases of yellow fever which they believed to
be direct results of mosquito inoculations.
There are other signs of a coming change in the weather known less generally. When birds of long ﬂight, such as swallows and others, hang about
home and ﬂy low—rain or wind may be expected. Also when animals seek sheltered places, instead of spreading over their usual range: when pigs
carry straw to their sties; and when smoke from chimneys does not ascend readily, an unfavourable change may be looked for. Dew, on the other
hand, is an indication of ﬁne weather. So is fog. Neither of of these two formations occurs under an overcast sky, or when there is much wind.
A ﬁerce onslaught was made against Alvinczy’s position by Massena’s corps. It was entirely unsuccessful, and the French were repulsed with the
serious loss of three thousand men. Bonaparte’s position was now even more critical than it had been at Castiglione; he had to contend with two
new Austrian armies, one on each ﬂank, and Wurmser with a third stood ready to sally out of Mantua in his rear. If there should be even partial
cooeperation between the Austrian leaders, he must retreat. But he felt sure there would be no cooeperation whatsoever.
The pendulum had swung—it was no longer the Federalist merchants of New England who were discontent with the policies of the governement,
but the planters of the South and particularly of South Carolina. New England was now in favor of a protective tariff. Webster, New England’s
foremost man at Washington, had voted against the tariff of 1816, but had changed his mind and supported a higher tariff in 1824, and a still higher
in 1828. The planters of the South had not found it easy to manufacture goods. They had little or nothing, therefore, to protect against the products
of European countries. On the contrary, they exported much to England, and imported from England and other countries many of the things they
consumed. Accordingly, they were opposed to the whole system of tariff taxation and desired free trade.
The water was wide and deep, so that he could not cross it. He, however, went down to the brink of the water, and got a good drink. This refreshed
him very much, and then he went back again up the bank, and lay down upon the grass there to rest. Presently two cows came down to the water, on
the side opposite to where Tony was sitting.
The death of Socrates was brought under three of his enemies—Lycon, Meletus, and Anytus, the last a man of high rank and reputation in the
state. Socrates was accused by them of despising the ancient gods of the state, introducing new divinities and corrupting the youth of Athens. He
was charged with having taught his followers, young men of the ﬁrst Athenian families, to despise the established government, to be turbulent and
seditious, and his accusors pointed to Alcibiades and Critias, notorious for their lawlessness, as examples of the fruits of his teaching.
In some places the wires came very near together, and in others the spaces between them were so wide, that Wallace thought that the squirrel, if by
any chance he should ever get put into the cage, would be very likely to squeeze his way out. Then, besides, Phonny had not measured his wires in
respect to length, but had cut them off of various lengths, taking care however not to have any of them too short. The result was that the ends of the
wires projected to various distances above the board, presenting a ragged and unworkmanlike appearance.
Garrity was the most sinister ﬁgure in organized baseball. Once a newspaper reporter, he had somehow obtained control of the Rockets by chicanery
and fraud. Sympathy and gratitude were sentiments unknown to him. He would work a winning pitcher to death, and then send the man shooting
down to the minors the moment he showed the slightest symptom of weakness. He scoffed at regulations and bylaws; he deﬁed restraint and control;
he was in a constant wrangle with other owners and managers; and as a creator of discord and dissension he held the belt.
Table 5: The ten paragraphs we use as premises in our experiments. We refer to these contexts as Sound, Faraday,
Yellow, Weather, Battle, Tariff, Water, Socrates, Wires, and Garrity, respectively.
Figure 5: Our Amazon Mechanical Turk interface for the model-in-the-loop setting.