Title: Interscript: A dataset for interactive learning of scripts through error feedback

INTERSCRIPT : A dataset for interactive learning of scripts through error feedback
Niket Tandon, Aman Madaany, Peter Clark,
Keisuke Sakaguchi, Yiming Yangy,
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, USA
yLanguage Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
fnikett,peterc,keisukes g@allenai.org
famadaan,yiming g@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
How can an end-user provide feedback if a deployed struc-
tured prediction model generates inconsistent output, ignor-
ing the structural complexity of human language? This is
an emerging topic with recent progress in synthetic or con-
strained settings, and the next big leap would require test-
ing and tuning models in real-world settings. We present a
new dataset, INTERSCRIPT , containing user feedback on a
deployed model that generates complex everyday tasks. IN-
TERSCRIPT1contains 8,466 data points– the input is a possi-
bly erroneous script and a user feedback and the output is a
modiﬁed script. We posit two use-cases of INTERSCRIPT that
might signiﬁcantly advance the state-of-the-art in interactive
learning.
1 Introduction
While language models have achieved remarkable perfor-
mance on several reasoning tasks (Wang et al. 2018; Tal-
mor et al. 2019), they are still prone to mistakes (Bender and
Koller 2020). This is especially true in structured prediction
settings because models can ignore the structural complexity
of human language, and rely on simplistic and error-prone
greedy search procedures (Martins 2020). For example, this
leads to critical mistakes in (i) machine translation (such as
words being dropped or named entities mistranslated) or (ii)
script generation by a digital assistant to accomplish goals
(such as an implausible order of visiting a place and then
driving a car to get there).
Recent work (Sakaguchi et al. 2021) underscores the gap
between the syntax and semantic correctness of machine-
generated output in the context of automatic script genera-
tion. Sakaguchi et al. (2021) report that their models gen-
erate scripts that look ostensibly valid. We conduct an ini-
tial study of their generated scripts (see §3.2), and ﬁnd that
at least 20% of the generated scripts contain commonsense
mistakes that an average user would be able to point out.
This study indicates that such situations can greatly beneﬁt
from human assistance in the form of a feedback on the er-
ror. Figure 1 shows an example of such an erroneous script
and the corresponding feedback, where a model-generated
script contains an error: it states that the steps of “driving”
and “get in the car” can be applied in any order. The user
1Code & data: https://github.com/allenai/interscript
Figure 1: For an input goal (see an alligator), the T5-XXL
model presented in (Sakaguchi et al. 2021) produces an in-
correct script, where the order of the edges is not correct. A
human provides a feedback in ﬂuent language. Our dataset,
INTERSCRIPT , contains more than 8K examples of this kind
with the objective of advancing interactive learning.
provides general feedback “Get in a car before driving”. In
a structured setting like script generation, feedback must be
localized (e.g., in script generation, this means pointing out
the erroneous edge or node in whose context the feedback is
provided).
Teaching a machine via human instructions has long been
a goal of AI. Datasets have been crucial in recent AI progress
(Wang et al. 2018) and a recent line of work investigates mit-
igating this problem by curating datasets. Notable datasets to
advance interactive learning are RuleTaker (Clark, Tafjord,
and Richardson 2020), TeachYourAI (Talmor et al. 2020)
and other dialog datasets such as Padmakumar et al. (2021);
Campos et al. (2019).
Such feedback-driven correction has also been investi-
gated, though in a limited setting, in structured tasks. Wang,
Liang, and Manning (2016) and Mehta and Goldwasser
(2019) allow correction to block trajectories in a simulated
Block worlds setting. Splash dataset (Elgohary et al. 2021;
Elgohary, Hosseini, and Hassan Awadallah 2020) based
NLEdit system (Elgohary et al. 2021) allows users to correct
semantic parsing errors on database queries using natural
language. While encouraging, they are limited in their gen-arXiv:2112.07867v2  [cs.AI]  16 Dec 2021
eral applicability due to the synthetic nature of the dataset
or task or due to example-speciﬁc feedback which does not
generalize (feedback provided to a query for a database
schema might not apply to other queries). Thus, there is still
a lack of real-world datasets that can be used to develop sys-
tems with feedback-driven correction.
We ﬁll this gap by introducing INTERSCRIPT , a crowd-
sourced dataset of 8,466 (ybad; fb!ygood)examples,
where ybadis an erroneous script, fbthe feedback, and ygood
is the corrected script. The dataset comprises three types of
feedback fb, (i) explicit (directly mentions the error or local-
izes the error), (ii) implicit (the feedback highlights a general
principle which is easy to mentally apply to the given er-
ror), (iii) distractor feedback (the feedback should not have
any effect). Existing datasets provide either explicit or im-
plicit feedback in a synthetic or controlled setting, while IN-
TERSCRIPT is designed to be natural, open, and comprehen-
sive across feedback types. We posit two use-cases of IN-
TERSCRIPT on interactive graph correction and continuous
learning that might signiﬁcantly advance the state-of-the-art
in interactive learning.
We believe this is a ﬁrst step towards the larger goal
of developing interactive machine learning systems for the
widespread structured prediction tasks.
2 Related work
Interactive Learning: Interactive learning involves a hu-
man in the loop, as opposed to learning from datasets col-
lected ofﬂine. Relevant approaches in NLP range from ac-
tive learning (Raghavan 2006; Wu et al. 2019) to dialogue
systems that adapt to user utterances, spanning diverse do-
mains (Holzinger 2016). There are various modes of interac-
tion (through labels (Raghavan 2006; Fails and Olsen 2003),
utterance (Radlinski et al. 2019), imitation (Brantley, Sharaf,
and Daum’e 2020), and language (Elgohary, Awadallah et al.
2020)). Our work uses language as the mode of interaction.
Language-based interactions: Natural language interac-
tion allows for expressive human feedback to correct a
model. In language-based interactions, controlled settings
(Mehta and Goldwasser 2019; Wang, Liang, and Manning
2016) give a better handle and are easy to evaluate. How-
ever, they do not generalize to real-world settings – human
feedback is rich, and it is not desirable to be restricted to a
vocabulary. Finally, the model being taught is treated either
as (i) a black box (as in machine teaching (Dasgupta et al.
2019; Talmor et al. 2020)) or (ii) the beliefs of the model are
in some form exposed to feedback (as in interactive semantic
parsing (Elgohary et al. 2021)). These systems are typically
enabled by an underlying dataset. This paper is uniquely po-
sitioned because we present the ﬁrst dataset, which has real
user interaction through language in a real-world, open do-
main, structured prediction setting.
Interactive Semantic Parsing: The common theme in
prior approaches is based on interactive semantic parsing
(such as Elgohary et al. (2021); Wang, Liang, and Man-
ning (2016)). User feedback is mapped into structure edit
commands, which can then be executed on the incorrectstructures to ﬁx it. For example, (Elgohary et al. 2021)
presented NLE DITto ﬁx SQL queries using human feed-
back such as: replace course id with program
id.. However, the feedback is syntactic with a certain task-
speciﬁc formal structure, e.g., NLE DITis known to struggle
with natural feedback that does not describe an edit directly
(Elgohary et al. 2021). Typically, rather than highlighting a
problem or error, these data contain an answer to ﬁx the er-
ror. This “answer containing” feedback is then parsed using
semantic parsing techniques into a set of structure edit com-
mands.
Unlike NL-Edit, we do not make assumptions about the
structure of the feedback. Moreover, we assume that the
feedback would be non-actionable (pointing out some local
or global error without providing a solution to ﬁx the error).
This should especially hold with the growing complexity of
the structure to give feedback because it is simpler for a hu-
man to point to the problem rather than enumerate (in nat-
ural language) the edits that might be required. Further, the
feedback in our case is exchangeable. In NLE DITwhere the
feedback is speciﬁc to a query and is grounded in a database
schema. In contrast, the feedback in our case addresses a
general (commonsense) error with the script, and applies to
other scripts with similar issues
3 Inspiration: Script generation
Complex everyday events, such as visiting a restaurant, can
typically be described as a sequence of distinct sub-events
and actions. Scripts (Schank and Abelson 1975) are an efﬁ-
cient way of capturing information about the sub-events and
sequences that form a complex event. A prominent example
of scripts in a modern context is their use in digital assistants
like Siri, which organize common tasks such as setting up a
reminder in script-like workﬂows (Zhang et al. 2021).
The eventual goal of this line of work is, given a goal plan,
to execute in a real-world or virtual environment such as AL-
FRED (Shridhar et al. 2020). An intermediate step to reach
there is to generate the script given a task such as “bake a
cake”, “ﬁx a bike tire” or “fuel a car”.
3.1 Script generation
Formally, the script generation task (Sakaguchi et al. 2021)
takes as input a scenario and generates a script G(V; E ),
where Vis a set of essential events fv1; :::v i; :::v jVjgand
Eis a set of temporal ordering constraints between events
feijgwhich means that the events vimust precede the event
vj(vivj). Partial ordering of events is possible, e.g., you
can wear a left sock and a right sock in any temporal order.
To solve this task, script generation models are required to
generate events ( V) and predict the edges ( E) jointly. See
Figure 2 for an example.
PROSCRIPT gen(Sakaguchi et al. 2021) is a recently re-
leased model that, given a goal, generates Vand predicts the
edge structure Ejointly. It is based on the T5-XXL model
(11B parameters) and generates the script as a graph in DOT
format. The authors report that the DOT format is always
valid at inference time and that Vand the graph structure are
generally of high quality. They characterize the graph edits
ﬁnd the cake recipegather the ingredientsturn on the ovenmix the ingredientsput the cake batter in the ovenbake for the right amount of timetake the cake out of the ovenScenario: bake a cakeFigure 2: An example of a script in Sakaguchi et al. (2021).
In a script generation task, models take the goal as the input
and generate a (possibly) partial-order graph, which consists
of essential steps and their ordering.
required to correct a generated script (such as removing a
node, adding a node, changing edge order, etc.). Mechani-
cal Turk workers were able to correct most of the generated
scripts within a few edits (typically an edit distance of 5).
This makes for an attractive use-case for interactive learning
because the generated content from the model (i) is not com-
pletely off and (ii) naturally exposes its belief/understanding
of the goal through the edge structure, and a user can critique
or provide feedback on this belief.
3.2 Initial study
How do the corrective edits typically look like? On Pro-
Script’s test set, we performed inference using the released
checkpoint (both GPT-2 and T5-XXL based model). We ran-
domly sampled 30 generated graphs and manually wrote
feedback for them (see Table 1). On average, there were
about two mistakes present in the graphs. Often, the error
was that the script was using an entity before having it (e.g.,
write on the paper comes before the node ﬁnd the paper or
reach for the paper). Thus, there seems to be a possibility
of applying similar feedback to more than one example. We
also found some cases where the script might have to be
changed to adapt to special cases. For example, for a script
visit Disneyland , an event obtain a visa might be required for
some users. We believe the original ProScript dataset aims
to generate widely applicable scripts and grounded in com-
monsense; rather than cover all possible outcomes.
3.3 Conclusions from the initial study
On the surface, the generated scripts were of good quality.
However, a closer look at the mistakes revealed that most
of them could be attributed to the model lacking basic com-
monsense. For example, Figure 1 shows a typical mistake
the model makes. This underscores the gap between the syn-
tax and semantic correctness of machine-generated output inWhat was the error General principle feedback
Script was missing the step of
not turning off the alarm after
waking upPeople don’t leave their
alarms ringing all day.
Script mentioned coming
to the doorway and passing
through itOne cannot walk through the
doorway without opening the
door ﬁrst.
Script tells that getting in car
and drive in zoo can be done
in any orderPeople must get into a vehicle,
before driving to any place.
Script is looking for a butter-
ﬂy after placing itYou don’t need to look for a
butterﬂy if it’s already in a
container.
Table 1: Sample feedback on the examples in the study.
the context of automatic script generation. This observation
is in-line with other NLP tasks (Bender and Koller 2020) that
distinguish the success of recent models on the correctness
of form rather than the far-from-over goal of understanding
of meaning.
We had two questions: (i) Is there a set of general com-
monsense principles that the model fails to adhere to. (ii)
How can the model incorporate simple feedback and im-
prove? It is costly to retrain large LMs such as the T5-XXL
model, and we hoped to make a new component that learns
to take feedback from a user. However, we could not ﬁnd
any dataset to solve such an interactive learning problem.
Despite recent progress in synthetic or constrained settings,
a real-world dataset in a structured prediction setting does
not exist. Like with this example, structured prediction mod-
els can generate inconsistent output, ignoring the structural
complexity of human language. Their decoding is typically
based on greedy or sample decoding, and structural incoher-
ence is a possibility. If such a dataset exists with feedback
on the generated structure, it would help improve structured
outputs– a widespread problem. How can an end-user pro-
vide feedback if a deployed structured prediction model gen-
erates inconsistent output, ignoring the structural complexity
of human language? This is an emerging topic with recent
progress in synthetic or constrained settings, and the next
big leap would require testing and tuning models in real-
world settings. We present a new dataset, INTERSCRIPT ,
containing user feedback on a deployed model that gener-
ates complex everyday tasks. INTERSCRIPT2contains 8,466
data points– the input is a possibly erroneous script and a
user feedback and the output is a modiﬁed script. We posit
two use-cases of INTERSCRIPT that might signiﬁcantly ad-
vance the state-of-the-art in interactive learning.
4 INTERSCRIPT collection
We believe that an average user could point out mistakes in
the generated scripts, as a majority of the errors in generated
scripts are caused by a lack of basic commonsense (§3.2).
Consequently, we designed a Mechanical Turk task to pro-
2Code & data: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/interscript
vide feedback on mistakes. A broad overview of the annota-
tion process is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: A broad overview of the annotation process. For
actual annotation task (including the M-turk task template),
see our code repository.
Annotation Now we discuss our crowdsourcing setup to
collect INTERSCRIPT . To maximize the opportunity to get
more feedbacks for a predicted script, we ﬁltered a sub-
set of the test set in ProScript where the human evaluated
graph edit distance was likely to be high (i.e., there were
likely to be more errors). The ProScript authors released the
graph edit value for the set of test set samples they eval-
uated. We performed inference using their released PRO-
SCRIPT genmodel on those data points with high graph edit
distance value (8). With this we collected about 400 (pre-
dicted graph, expected gold graph) tuples. The ProScript pa-
per describes that their expected gold graph is also imperfect
and might contain about 20% noise. Nevertheless, having
the gold reference graph guides and constrains an annotator
about the common script for a scenario rather than the wide
open space of solving the task using multiple potentially cor-
rect scripts. (e.g., one could go to a zoo without driving the
car by hiring a taxi and then they won’t need to drive or park
the car). As mentioned in §3.2 our annotation process must
focus on scripts that are widely applicable and grounded in
commonsense.
The annotators are shown the model-generated and ex-
pected gold (reference) scripts, and are required to answer
which script is worse and why. It is possible that the gold
script is marked as worse. However, we later post-process
and remove such cases, as our focus is to get errors on
the generated scripts and not the manually created scripts.
The annotators must point out an egregious mistake (e.g., an
event or an edge that does not follow commonsense). They
were asked to ignore grammatical and ﬂuency errors, and
focus on critical errors of four types:
Wrong ordering: the order in the sequence of steps is
not correct (e.g., wearing shoes is described before wear-
ing socks).
Flexible ordering: some steps can be done in a ﬂexible
order (e.g., you can wear left sock or right sock ﬁrst). A
good script captures such ﬂexibility.
Missing critical steps: a bad script might have missed
critical steps (e.g., the script can say: “wait for a plane”
followed by “get off the plane” – here an obvious step
“get on the plane” is missing) . There is no strict deﬁni-tion for a critical step, so the annotators were instructed
to use their commonsense judgment.
Wrong step: a bad script might have irrelevant and
wrong steps (e.g., the script describing “go to a party”
might describe an irrelevant step such as read a book,
open a book, etc.).
For every data point, the annotators were asked to answer
the following:
1. Explicit feedback type-1: the error type (missing step,
wrong step, wrong order, wrong partial order)
2. Explicit feedback type-2: localize the error by providing
the erroneous node or edge id
3. Implicit feedback type-1: give feedback in a few words,
explaining the error
4. Implicit feedback type-2: An explanation of the error that
would potentially make sense to a ﬁve-year-old. This was
aimed to explain the feedback to gather the general prin-
ciple behind the feedback.
Figure 4 shows a sample of our Mechanical Turk task.
Annotators were required to list only one critical error that
they believe was most important. Each data point is anno-
tated by three annotators, adding some diversity in the er-
rors. The annotators were paid $15 an hour. Estimated time
for completion of one script was 2 minutes. We monitored
all the jobs via comments, and the annotators did not raise
any concerns about the pay or the nature of the task or its
difﬁculty.
We measured the agreement on labels (which graph is
worse), and on explicit feedback type-1 and type-2. It was
difﬁcult to measure agreement on implicit feedback because
it is not easy to perform binary comparison on the gener-
ated text without accounting for linguistic variations. On the
labels, the Fleiss Kappa agreement was 0.90 (almost perfect
agreement) and on explicit feedback the agreement was 0.75
Fleiss Kappa (substantial agreement). This also shows that
there is some diversity in what the users perceive as a serious
mistake in ybad.
Eventually, we compiled these annotations into a dataset
of 1,553 tuples of the type (explicit feedback
type-1, explicit feedback type-2,
implicit feedback type-1, implicit
feedback type-2) .
Distractor feedback We also add distractor feedbacks,
these are cases when the feedback does not apply to the
graph. This covers the real-world scenario when a user gives
an irrelevant feedback, then an interactive model must be
convinced that the feedback is not applicable. To do this, we
ﬁnd the top-k neighbors of the input graph and rest of the
graphs by encoding the graphs using Sentence transform-
ers (Reimers and Gurevych 2019), and then compute cosine
distance. To get irrelevant but lexically related feedback, we
attached the feedback of the least similar example (at rank=k
and k-1). By random sampling we manually found that k=4
gives reasonable lexical similarity but the feedback are not
applicable across the scripts. This subset gives us another
approximately 2,026 instances.
Figure 4: The mechanical turk page for annotation. We show the generated and the expected ProScript gold reference. The
annotator must answer which script is worse and why. They must point out an egregious mistake (and not any trivial errors
that have minor grammatical errors), and annotate: the error type (missing step, wrong step, wrong order, wrong partial order),
localize the error by providing the node or edge id, and give feedback why it is wrong, and ﬁnally to gather the general principle
behind the feedback they are asked to explain the feedback to a ﬁve-year-old.
fbtype count example
explicit fb
type-11,553 Remove node ‘put the shirt on’
explicit fb
type-21,553 The following step is not right: put
the shirt on
implicit fb
type-11,553 It tells you to iron your shirt while
it’s still on your body.
implicit fb
type-21,553 If you hold a hot iron against the
clothes you’re currently wearing,
you’ll get terrible burns.
distractor
fb2,026 People do not use two scissors at a
time, they simply use one
shared fb 228 (illustrative) It tells you to iron your
pant while it’s still on your body
total 8,466 https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
interscript/data.json
Table 2: INTERSCRIPT dataset statistics.
Shared feedback We often encounter recurring themes or
nearly similar situations, and these pairs should share much
of their feedback. For example, suppose the goal is to buy
grocery and the generated graph is missing an important step
like pay for the item. In that case, we can synthesize new
examples from it by replacing “grocery” with “toilet paper”
or “clothes” in the tuple ( ybad,fb,ygood). We manually label
a subset of 50 examples by substituting a word in the goal
and creating a new tuple.
We compile these data points into 8,466 samples – each
sample is a tuple ( ybad,fb,ygood). Table 2 breaks down the
total number of samples by feedback type.
We next describe two scenarios where it can potentially
advance the ﬁeld.
5 Potential Use Cases
We outline two use cases of INTERSCRIPT that this dataset
can potentially enable and advance interactive learning in
real-world use cases.
Use case 1: Learning to apply feedback The ﬁrst use
case is in training a model that learns to react to user feed-
back. The model can either apply the feedback or suggest
that the feedback is not applicable. In a real-world structured
prediction setting, such a system would be able to correct its
answers even after deployment. There has been recent inter-
est in this line of work, most recently with OpenAI instruct
series3which are specialized to follow a user’s instructions.
See Figure 5 for an illustrative example.
Use case 2: Maintaining a memory of feedback. A
system often encounters recurring themes or situations, or
nearly similar situations, e.g., people must get into a vehicle
before driving to any place. Many of the feedback in IN-
TERSCRIPT are based on such general principles that allow
the model to use feedback on one context in a different but
similar context.
3https://beta.openai.com/docs/engines/instruct-series-beta
Figure 5: Use case 1: Learning to apply feedback.
For example, consider a model-generated script for the
goal put a bag in the trunk , where the model does not in-
clude an event open the trunk in the generated script. If the
model receives a feedback “cannot keep something if the
container is closed” for this script, then this error situation
is analogous to an error of suggesting to keep a pizza in the
oven without opening the oven. If a model can maintain a
memory of errors, it would be possible to envision a system
that uses past failures in related error contextscontexts.
Figure 6: Use case 2: Maintaining a memory of feedback.
Such failure-driven reminding draws inspiration from the
“recursive reminding” theory in psychology, which sug-
gests that humans remember (in the episodic memory for
an event) the context in which they made an error and the
received correction. Humans think not only of the error but
also of the surrounding context in which it was made and
associate it with the correction. In line with this theory, a
learner’s (model’s) mistakes and the feedback from the user
could be in a learner’s memory. This will be one instance
of a continuous learning model learning with our data (es-
pecially the shared feedback subset). Figure 6 presents an
illustrative example.
6 Conclusion
We presented INTERSCRIPT , the ﬁrst real-world dataset for
interactive script generation, through error feedback. The
dataset contains 8,466 data points with a rich hierarchy of
feedback types. We outlined two use cases that this dataset
can potentially enable. These use cases could advance inter-
active machine learning, especially for very large language
models that are difﬁcult to retrain after deployment.
References
Bender, E. M.; and Koller, A. 2020. Climbing towards NLU:
On Meaning, Form, and Understanding in the Age of Data.
InACL.
Brantley, K.; Sharaf, A.; and Daum’e, H. 2020. Active Imi-
tation Learning with Noisy Guidance. In ACL.
Campos, J. A.; Otegi, A.; Etxabe, A. S.; Deriu, J.; Cieliebak,
M.; and Agirre, E. 2019. Conversational QA for FAQs. In
Conversational AI workshop at NeurIPS 2019 .
Clark, P.; Tafjord, O.; and Richardson, K. 2020. Trans-
formers as soft reasoners over language. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.05867 .
Dasgupta, S.; Hsu, D. J.; Poulis, S.; and Zhu, X. 2019.
Teaching a black-box learner. In ICML .
Elgohary, A.; Awadallah, A. H.; et al. 2020. Speak to
your Parser: Interactive Text-to-SQL with Natural Language
Feedback. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , 2065–2077.
Elgohary, A.; Hosseini, S.; and Hassan Awadallah, A. 2020.
Speak to your Parser: Interactive Text-to-SQL with Natu-
ral Language Feedback. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
2065–2077. Online: Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Elgohary, A.; Meek, C.; Richardson, M.; Fourney, A.;
Ramos, G.; et al. 2021. NL-EDIT: Correcting semantic parse
errors through natural language interaction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.14540 .
Fails, J. A.; and Olsen, D. 2003. Interactive machine learn-
ing. In IUI ’03 .
Holzinger, A. 2016. Interactive machine learning for health
informatics: when do we need the human-in-the-loop? Brain
Informatics , 3: 119–131.
Martins, A. F. T. 2020. DeepSPIN: Deep Structured Predic-
tion for Natural Language Processing. In Proceedings of the
22nd Annual Conference of the European Association for
Machine Translation , 493–494.
Mehta, N.; and Goldwasser, D. 2019. Improving Natu-
ral Language Interaction with Robots Using Advice. In
NAACL-HLT .
Padmakumar, A.; Thomason, J.; Shrivastava, A.; Lange, P.;
Narayan-Chen, A.; Gella, S.; Piramithu, R.; Tur, G.; and
Hakkani-T ¨ur, D. Z. 2021. TEACh: Task-driven Embodied
Agents that Chat. ArXiv , abs/2110.00534.
Radlinski, F.; Balog, K.; Byrne, B.; and Krishnamoorthi,
K. 2019. Coached Conversational Preference Elicitation: A
Case Study in Understanding Movie Preferences. In SIG-
dial.
Raghavan, H. 2006. Active Learning with Feedback on Both
Features and Instances. In JMLR ’06 .
Reimers, N.; and Gurevych, I. 2019. Sentence-BERT:
Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , 3982–3992. Hong Kong, China: Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Sakaguchi, K.; Bhagavatula, C.; Bras, R. L.; Tandon,
N.; Clark, P.; et al. 2021. proScript: Partially Or-
dered Scripts Generation via Pre-trained Language Models.
arXiv:2104.08251.
Schank, R. C.; and Abelson, R. P. 1975. Scripts, Plans and
Knowledge. In IJCAI , 151–157.
Shridhar, M.; Thomason, J.; Gordon, D.; Bisk, Y .; Han, W.;
Mottaghi, R.; Zettlemoyer, L.; and Fox, D. 2020. ALFRED:
A Benchmark for Interpreting Grounded Instructions for Ev-
eryday Tasks. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 10737–10746.
Talmor, A.; Herzig, J.; Lourie, N.; and Berant, J. 2019. Com-
monsenseQA: A Question Answering Challenge Targeting
Commonsense Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , 4149–4158. Min-
neapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Talmor, A.; Tafjord, O.; Clark, P.; Goldberg, Y .; and Berant,
J. 2020. Teaching Pre-Trained Models to Systematically
Reason Over Implicit Knowledge. NeurIPS .
Wang, A.; Singh, A.; Michael, J.; Hill, F.; Levy, O.; and
Bowman, S. R. 2018. GLUE: A Multi-Task Benchmark
and Analysis Platform for Natural Language Understanding.
ArXiv , abs/1804.07461.
Wang, S. I.; Liang, P.; and Manning, C. D. 2016. Learn-
ing Language Games through Interaction. In Proceedings
of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2368–2378.
Berlin, Germany: Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Wu, Y .; Xu, Y .; Singh, A.; Yang, Y .; and Dubrawski, A.
2019. Active learning for graph neural networks via node
feature propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07567 .
Zhang, Y .; Jauhar, S. K.; Kiseleva, J.; White, R.; and Roth,
D. 2021. Learning to Decompose and Organize Com-
plex Tasks. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , 2726–
2735. Online: Association for Computational Linguistics.