Title: Open-Domain Conversational Agents: Current Progress, Open Problems, and Future Directions

Open-Domain Conversational Agents:
Current Progress, Open Problems, and Future Directions
Stephen Roller, Y-Lan Boureau, Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Emily Dinan,
Angela Fan, David Gunning, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Spencer Poff, Pratik Ringshia,
Kurt Shuster, Eric Michael Smith, Arthur Szlam, Jack Urbanek, Mary Williamson
Facebook AI Research
parlai@fb.com
Abstract
We present our view of what is necessary to build an engaging
open-domain conversational agent: covering the qualities of
such an agent, the pieces of the puzzle that have been built so
far, and the gaping holes we have not ﬁlled yet. We present a
biased view, focusing on work done by our own group, while
citing related work in each area. In particular, we discuss in
detail the properties of continual learning, providing engaging
content, and being well-behaved – and how to measure success
in providing them. We end with a discussion of our experience
and learnings, and our recommendations to the community.
Good open-domain conversationalists seamlessly blend
entertaining wit and knowledge while making others feel
heard. The breadth of possible conversation topics and lack
of a well-deﬁned objective make it challenging to deﬁne a
roadmap towards training a good conversational agent, or
chatbot. Despite recent progress across the board (Adiwar-
dana et al ., 2020; Roller et al ., 2020), conversational agents
are still incapable of carrying an open-domain conversation
that remains interesting, consistent, accurate, and reliably
well-behaved (e.g., not offensive) while navigating a variety
of topics.
Traditional task-oriented dialogue systems rely on slot-
ﬁlling and structured modules (e.g., Young et al .(2013); Gao
et al.(2019); Jurafsky and Martin (2019)). These approaches
have proven adept at producing usable commercial systems in
narrow domains such as plane ticket booking. However, they
are limited to the domain they were trained on and do not af-
ford generalization to new domains or open chit-chat settings,
necessitating the coding of many modules, or skills, and a
managing system that switches between them. End-to-end
approaches based on neural networks, on the other hand, offer
the promise of adapting to arbitrarily wide new domains with-
out additional handcrafting, but have yet to reach the full po-
tential promised. Deep architectures trained end-to-end have
been very successful in many other domains, such as speech
recognition (Hinton et al ., 2012; Collobert, Puhrsch, and Syn-
naeve, 2016), computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton, 2012), and machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le, 2014; Gehring et al ., 2017). Hence, the research com-
munity is investing heavily in improving end-to-end models
for dialogue (Zhang et al ., 2019; Adiwardana et al ., 2020;
Equal contribution to this position paper.Roller et al ., 2020), in the hope of achieving similar success.
In this paper, we highlight some of the recent work towards
that goal, beginning by attempting to deﬁne the problem itself.
We thus describe the desirable traits that we believe a super-
human open-domain conversational agent should have, state
principles our research follows, and propose ways to measure
our progress. We examine the challenges of this research pro-
gram, summarize the results we have already obtained, and
propose guidelines for the community to accelerate progress.
Note that while we try to cite related work where possible,
this article is written with a strong bias toward describing
the progress in the goals and research directions of our own
group. Further, we discuss only open academic research with
reproducible published results, hence we will not address
much of the considerable work that has been put into build-
ing commercial systems, where methods, data and results
are not in the public domain. Finally, given that we focus on
open-domain conversation, we do not focus on speciﬁc goal-
oriented techniques; we also do not cover spoken dialogue in
this work, focusing on text and image input/output only. For
more general recent surveys, see Gao et al .(2019); Jurafsky
and Martin (2019); Huang, Zhu, and Gao (2020).
Qualities of a Conversational Agent
We deﬁne our long-term goal as building a superhuman open-
domain conversational agent. That is, we aim to build an
agent that is preferred on average to an alternative human
speaking partner in open conversation, which we will discuss
in detail later in the measuring success section (evaluation
being an open problem in itself). We note that this is different
from passing a Turing test (Turing, 1950): we do not wish to
fool humans into believing our agent is human, but instead
that our agent should be enjoyed as a speaking partner, which
we believe is a simpler problem.
We expect that such an agent must be continually-learning ,
must provide engaging content during conversations, and
should be well-behaved . Each of these high-level traits can
be unpacked into a number of behaviors and attributes, many
of which constitute major research directions with open ques-
tions. We describe each of the main properties in turn, along
with their major challenges.arXiv:2006.12442v2  [cs.CL]  13 Jul 2020
Continually Learning
Continual learning is a cornerstone of the conversational
agent we envision, allowing it to adapt to new contexts, new
users, keep up to date with current conversation topics, and
continuously improve. This entails three primary skills: con-
tinuous online training of underlying models, extracting use-
ful learning signals from interaction, and updating relevant
sources of knowledge.
Continual Online Training Recent dialogue research has
leveraged various data sources for training: corpora of human-
human conversations in narrow domains (see Serban et al .
(2018) and the list of currently available ParlAI tasks1for
a large set of available corpora), public conversations on
internet discussion boards or social media, or acted dialogues
from crowdsourced workers (Zhang et al ., 2018; Dinan et al .,
2019b; Shuster et al ., 2018; Rashkin et al ., 2019; Shuster et
al., 2020; Smith et al ., 2020). Relying on static datasets allows
for reproducibility and model comparisons, but creates a
potential mismatch of data distribution between train time and
deployment of the conversational agent. The framework of
combining a pre-trained model with ﬁne-tuning over another
dataset of interest has generally produced good results, as we
have seen in much of our work (Dinan et al ., 2019a, 2020,
2019b; Humeau et al ., 2019; Rashkin et al ., 2019; Zhang et
al., 2019; Shuster et al ., 2020; Smith et al ., 2020; Roller et
al., 2020). However, this ﬁne-tuning procedure over a static
dataset still does not allow for dynamically adapting to new
topics of interest or new audiences, and the current set of
available tasks is far from covering everything that an open-
domain conversation might touch on. Thus, an important part
of our research program consists in deploying conversational
agents so that new data of humans interacting with the agent
in an open-ended conversation can continuously be obtained
and used for ﬁne-tuning models with fresh data.
Open problems . Obtaining a source of continually renewed
data opens the door to many open problems. The general chal-
lenges of never-ending learning (Mitchell et al ., 2018; Carl-
son et al ., 2010) and avoiding catastrophic forgetting (French,
1999; Kirkpatrick et al ., 2017) have a particular ﬂavor in the
domain of conversation: the general task is always to talk to
people about any subject, but the set of people, the topics of
interest, the facts that have happened may all change. As in
other domains, the performance that can be achieved on a
task after ﬁne-tuning is highly dependent on the data a model
has been pre-trained on. Empirical evidence suggests that
data with a very large range of domains (e.g., social media
data) provides the best basis for ﬁne-tuning (Zhang et al .,
2019; Shuster et al ., 2020; Adiwardana et al ., 2020; Roller
et al., 2020). It remains unclear how to elicit interaction
data that would be the most useful as a general-purpose pre-
training corpus. Comparisons across many different types
of pre-training suggest that training on many existing dia-
logue corpora is not as effective across the board as simply
using readily available non-interactive corpora (Shuster et
al., 2020). The same may be true of any interactive data
we collect in the context of a given framework. Continual
1https://parl.ai/docs/tasks.html
Data
Dialogue (HB)
FeedbackSelf-feeding 
chatbotUser
Deploy Train
x (context)
x (context) (x,f)f
(feedback)y
(response)
x
ModelsInterface(x,y) HB
(x,y) HH
(x,s)
(x,f)
RetrainDialogue (HH)
Satisfactiony y
qss>t
f
Figure 1: The self-feeding chatbot trains on the dialogues it
engages in to continually learn (Hancock et al., 2019).
training also requires ﬁguring out the best trade-off between
being able to stay current (biasing towards more recent data)
and retaining ability to talk about past topics. There could
be many different policies around this, and reinforcement
learning could be used to explore and optimize to ﬁnd the
best successful ones, in terms of people’s satisfaction. More
generally, a continually learning agent is a good substrate for
comparing policies targeting all kinds of desirable objectives
such as all the traits mentioned in this overview. However,
determining what a good reinforcing signal should be for
open-domain conversation is very much still an open prob-
lem: contrary to goal-oriented dialogue, where there is a clear
sense of what the reward is, open-domain conversation does
not have natural rewards. Implicit signals such as dialogue
length and frequency of engagement have been used as met-
rics to rate models, for example for the Alexa prize (Ashwin
et al., 2017), but capture the ability to create a sticky habit
rather than the quality of the interaction per se. Repeatedly
asking users for satisfaction or detailed quality ratings is cum-
bersome and decreases the ﬂuidity of the interaction. Some
attempts at predicting a quality score from a range of different
signals have shown some positive results (Serban et al ., 2017;
Fang et al ., 2018; Ghandeharioun et al ., 2019), and have been
used to train models through reinforcement learning (Serban
et al., 2017; Fang et al ., 2018), but they still show limited
correlation with gold standard quality ratings (Serban et al .,
2017). This approach leads to the next topic – how to learn
from interaction directly in the conversation rather than from
a separate rating functionality.
Learning from interaction Beyond training on additional
in-distribution data in a self-supervised way, an exciting av-
enue for reﬁning conversational agents consists in taking
advantage of the interactive character of a conversation by
directly soliciting feedback from conversation partners. This
has been explored in Hancock et al .(2019), where a “self-
feeding chatbot” learns to estimate its partner’s satisfaction
and can also ask for feedback when it believes it has made
a mistake, see Figure 1. Learning from these additional sig-
nals signiﬁcantly improves performance, especially when the
amount of data is initially small. There has also been some
work on predicting conversation quality from signals such
as sentiment or questions (Ghandeharioun et al ., 2019) or
using other forms of feedback from the conversation (Li et
al., 2017a,b; Weston, 2016; Yang et al ., 2017), but results are
still preliminary.
Open problems . Feedback that is not explicitly requested
by the conversational agent is not clearly marked as being
about the conversation itself and not about the subject of the
conversation. For example, detecting a negative sentiment
could mean that the conversation partner is upset about some-
thing that happened to them outside of the conversation, and
the appropriate response would then be to display empathy,
not ﬁgure out how the conversation generation went wrong.
Another open problem is how to use sentiment or other sig-
nals inferred from the conversation in a reinforcement learn-
ing setting, as an objective of open-domain conversation. An
example would be to try and avoid offensive comments or
elicit positive sentiment. The objective of obtaining a given
emotional response from an artiﬁcial agent was in fact used
in a recent paper leveraging reinforcement learning in conver-
sation grounded in a fantasy adventure game (Prabhumoye et
al., 2020). But there are many difﬁculties when it comes to
optimizing directly over interaction rewards, or proxy auto-
mated metrics: models could try and dissuade conversation
partners from talking about anything negative, or only focus
on topics that are known to be more positive, rather than be-
ing truly generalist. Models optimizing a proxy metrics could
simply lead to those metrics becoming artiﬁcially inﬂated
and gradually decoupled from the true underlying quality of
the conversation.
Updating sources of knowledge A tip frequently given
to people aiming to become better conversationalists is to
consult the news to know what is currently happening. Con-
versation topics shift according to current events or trends,
and a good conversational agent needs to be able to adapt
to these trends. This could be achieved through a variety of
ways. If the agent has been trained to retrieve and incorporate
information from an external source of knowledge (Dinan et
al., 2019b; Qin et al ., 2019b; Prabhumoye, Quirk, and Galley,
2019; Ghazvininejad et al ., 2018), then simply updating that
source would allow the agent to inject current information
into the conversation. If the source is itself dynamic (e.g.,
Wikipedia is constantly being updated), then simply reading
from the updated version could be enough.
An important consideration when striving to stay current
is that this may put retrieval models at a disadvantage. Pure
retrieval models produce utterances by retrieving from a set
of training utterances. This precludes saying anything that
was not said before the time when the set of retrieval utter-
ances was created. Generative models build new utterances
from scratch and are therefore not subject to that limitation,
and they are naturally better suited to adapting to changing
contexts. Until recently, their performance was below that of
retrieval models (Dinan et al ., 2019b; Li, Weston, and Roller,
2019; Rashkin et al ., 2019; Shuster et al ., 2019; Zhang et al .,
2018), unless they relied on reﬁning retrieved utterances (We-
ston, Dinan, and Miller, 2018). However, larger pre-training
datasets coupled with improved decoding choices, such as im-posing a minimum length constraint on decoded generations,
has been shown to erase the superiority of retrieval models
(Roller et al ., 2020), and generative models are now being
rated highly by humans (Adiwardana et al ., 2020; Roller et
al., 2020) .
Open problems . The very nature of the challenge of staying
current makes it difﬁcult to devise a suitable benchmark, as
a static benchmark does not capture the ability of adapting
to changing topics. Some measure of that can be achieved
through partitioning data and topics between training and
validation/test (Dinan et al ., 2019b), but this only works in
settings where there is a clear delineation of topics, as op-
posed to the more ﬂuid nature of natural chitchat, and impor-
tantly, does not address the important point of deciding what
topics are interesting to introduce in a conversation in the
ﬁrst place. However there are already works in the space of
conversational AI that show promise for gauging an agent’s
ability to adapt. Dinan et al .(2019a) suggests a protocol for
a dynamically evolving benchmark; the same idea could be
adapted to gauge what topics a conversation partner expects
to be able to discuss with an agent, and update the agent
accordingly. The need for a dynamic benchmark is also a
potential advantage of deploying conversational agents for
wide-spread interaction with people: a dynamic benchmark
could then be deﬁned as a regular survey of people who en-
gage with a released conversational agent, for example asking
them to rate whether the agent was capable of conversing
about the topics that they were interested in.
Interacting with human users Our approach to achieving
continual learning at scale relies on large-scale interaction
with humans, which in turn requires our systems to be ﬁelded
and suitable for interaction with willing human users. To
that end, it is important to make conversational systems re-
silient and capable of handling many human conversation
partners. In particular, systems are easier to deploy and train
in a continual manner if they are computationally reason-
able. Architectures proposed in Humeau et al .(2019) achieve
promising trade-offs that maintain high performance while
allowing for substantial computational savings. As for con-
necting conversational agents to human conversation part-
ners, we have deployed a conversational agent as a publicly
available game2dual goal of collecting human utterances as
additional examples of good conversations, and obtaining
continuous human evaluation of new conversational models.
The game is structured as a voting game where a human is
paired with another human and is asked to write response ut-
terances, as well as select between utterances from the model
and utterances written by the other human player.
Open problems . While a lot of progress has been made
in making language architectures more compact, the best-
performing systems for end-to-end open conversation are still
relying on memory- and compute-heavy Transformer archi-
tectures (Adiwardana et al ., 2020; Roller et al ., 2020). Quan-
tizing models and diminishing their memory and computation
footprint is an exciting problem space, and could ultimately
allow people to interact with an on-device model. Recent
2https://parl.ai/projects/beat_the_bot
REGULAR MODEL
Nice, I like football too.
KNOWLEDGEABLE MODEL
I’ve always been more of a fan of the
American football team from Pittsburgh,
the Steelers!Knowledge level Dialogue
I’m a huge football fan - 
the Eagles are my favorite 
team!
Nice, I like football too.Figure 2: Using Knowledge: the Wizard of Wikipedia task
(Dinan et al., 2019b)
.
work on creating smaller architectures through knowledge
distillation (Sanh et al ., 2019), adaptive spans (Sukhbaatar
et al., 2019), and pruning (Fan, Grave, and Joulin, 2019)
provide promising directions for creating compact but high
performance models.
Engaging Content
Humans will not want to interact with an agent unless it
provides content that engages them in its messages. In a goal-
oriented setting (e.g., a weather forecast) this is minimally
supplied by achieving the goal, however even in those set-
tings, and especially in others without such clear goals, there
are multiple important factors that are at play. We cover some
of those issues here.
Expert & Knowledgeable Firstly, it is important that a
general conversationalist exhibit a broad familiarity with
different experiences or common background knowledge, or
else as a specialist conversationalist have in-depth expertise
in the skill demanded. In order to discuss with an art lover,
an agent should command a reasonable level of knowledge
about what are some famous pieces, techniques, or artists.
A science geek would similarly require some information
about space. An agent should exhibit the ability to work
with knowledge and facts, and incorporate this information
skillfully into its replies.
Traditional goal-oriented dialogue has focused on narrow
tasks that would typically be useful for a dialogue-based as-
sistant, for example restaurant (Henderson, Thomson, and
Williams, 2014), taxi, train, and hotel (Budzianowski et al .,
2018) or trip (El Asri et al ., 2017) booking. Classical goal-
oriented dialogue literature typically uses structured knowl-
edge, slot ﬁlling or labeling, and studies reinforcement learn-
ing extensively (Singh et al., 2000).
Question answering (QA) is another area where agents can
display their expertise, typically recalling knowledge from
large structured or unstructured resources and then formulat-
ing a response (Chen et al ., 2017; Fan et al ., 2019). Recent
QA datasets have extended to a conversational form with a
series of questions possibly referencing earlier ones in theconversation (Choi et al ., 2018; Reddy, Chen, and Manning,
2019).
However, neither goal-oriented nor QA tasks completely
cover what a knowledgeable open-domain conversational
agent should be able to do. To that end, human-human
dialogues where people discuss topics in depth have also
been studied. In Wizard of Wikipedia (Dinan et al ., 2019b)
22k such dialogues were collected between an expert part-
ner and a curious learner (see also Ghazvininejad et al .
(2018); Parthasarathi and Pineau (2018) for some other re-
lated datasets). To do this, 1k conversational topics were
ﬁrst crowdsourced, ranging from armadillos to ice cream to
lifeguards, and then each dialogue starts with a chosen topic
from among them. The expert speaker has access to a retrieval
search engine over Wikipedia with the last dialogue turns
as the query, and can thus inject knowledge obtained from
there into the conversation. The aim of collecting the data in
this way is one can then make this available to a conversa-
tional agent that learns to replace the human expert instead.
A new architecture, called Transformer Memory Networks,
was designed which yields more knowledgeable agents, out-
performing systems that do not employ a memory structure
for storing knowledge in both automatic metrics and human
evaluations. Generative model variants yield the most pro-
nounced improvement and are rated by humans as 26% more
engaging on average than their knowledgeless counterparts.
Our eventual hope is to combine these skills – open do-
main knowledgeable conversation, QA and task completion
amongst others – to build a truly engaging, knowledgeable
and skillful bot.
Open problems . Being expert and knowledgeable is con-
nected fundamentally to both memory andreasoning , es-
pecially commonsense reasoning, which we discuss in the
separate sections to follow. While we have made progress on
individual problems, e.g. speciﬁc tasks or question answering
in general, we are still missing a strong ability to transfer to
new tasks, one of the most fundamental open problems in
machine learning today. We believe this will be solved by im-
provements in both (i) architectures and learning mechanisms
that better incorporate compositionality; and (ii) continual
learning that updates knowledge and expertise in those tasks.
Expressiveness and Flow Maintaining a good conversa-
tion requires balance – between simplicity and detail; staying
on topic and changing it; asking questions and answering
them. In generative models, a known issue is their propensity
to produce short, dull utterances which over-use frequent
words, and under-use rare words – which does not follow
the human training distribution (Holtzman et al ., 2019; Fan,
Lewis, and Dauphin, 2018). Meanwhile at the discourse,
rather than single utterance level, the training procedures
typically employed are even less well suited – as the classi-
cal next token prediction objective is far from planning an
entire dialogue ﬂow. Thus, approaches that simply optimize
perplexity might fail to ask any questions of the user, for
example, or can repeat the same topic over and over (Dinan
et al., 2020).
Numerous works have attempted to work on the so-called
Engagingness3.2
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8
More generic No control More speciﬁcBeam search baseline Human
Repetition-controlled baseline Speciﬁcity-controlled Speciﬁcity control levelFigure 3: Controlling speciﬁcity in generative models affects
user engagingness evaluations (See et al., 2019).
Speciﬁcity level Dialogue
What do you do for a 
living?
I build antique homes and 
refurbish houses.
TOO SPICY!
I build antique homes, refurbish furniture, 
lauder plasma ﬁgurines, ﬁdget wood, etc.10SPICY
I build antique homes and refurbish houses.8MILD
My dad taught me everything I know - 
I’m a construction worker.4BLAND
I’m a construction worker.2
Figure 4: Speciﬁcity level using generative control (See et
al., 2019).
generic response problem. One solution is the use of control-
lable neural text generation methods, in particular conditional
training (Fan, Grangier, and Auli, 2018; Kikuchi et al ., 2016;
Peng et al ., 2018) and weighted decoding (Ghazvininejad
et al., 2017; Baheti et al ., 2018). These methods provide a
mechanism to control, and hence increase, the rare words
used, resulting in less generic utterances. In the work of
See et al .(2019), it was shown that controlling for such a
measure strongly affects engagingness according to human
evaluations, see Figures 3 and 4.
The work of See et al .(2019) goes further and shows
that it is possible to control multiple important attributes for
chitchat dialogue: repetition, speciﬁcity, response-relatedness
and question-asking, in order to optimize for well-balanced
conversations. Human evaluations measured the effect of
these control parameters on multi-turn interactive conversa-
tions on the PersonaChat task, and showed repetition and
question-asking were also similarly controllable, and impor-
tantly, provide clear improvements in human quality judg-
ments. The ﬁnal model is one of the best approaches on this
task (Li, Weston, and Roller, 2019).
Another recent approach is the use of so-called unlikeli-
hood training (Welleck et al ., 2020). Intended as a replace-
ment to classical likelihood training, it aims to ﬁx the problem
of degenerate neural text generation that occurs in language
modeling (Holtzman et al ., 2019). It works by applying a
penalization term against degenerate behavior, e.g. unwanted
Persona  (model) Dialogue
Hi, do you have any pets?
Cool, what are the names
of your cats?
I don’t have a cat, just a dog. 
Do you play any sports?I do! i have 2 cats.
I do not have any pets. 
What is your cats name?
Sadly, no, I sing in the church 
choir, so no home time.- I have 2 cats.
- I work as a teacher at a middle school.
- My favorite color is yellow.
- I dislike country music.
NEUTRAL ENTAILMENT CONTRADICTIONFigure 5: Dialogue natural language inference (Welleck et al .,
2019) can be used to make dialogue models more consistent.
repetitions that do not match the human training distribution,
pushing down the probability of those generations. In lan-
guage modeling this has been shown to outperform other
approaches such as nucleus sampling or beam blocking, pro-
ducing state-of-the-art generations. First experiments apply-
ing it to dialogue appear also promising (Li et al ., 2020).
Finally, simply adding minimal length constraints to genera-
tions has been shown to signiﬁcantly improve human ratings
(Roller et al., 2020).
Open problems . While appropriate decoding techniques
have helped generative models outperform retrieval mod-
els (Roller et al ., 2020) in evaluations, this still tends to
come from providing more sensible and on topic responses,
rather than expressing as rich or colorful language as re-
trieval models, e.g. they tend to overuse common n-grams,
and underuse rare words, and still tend to say they don’t
know things. Hence, to improve further, generative models
should be pushed to better mimic the human distribution of
training data, and to generalize that to new settings. Besides
the quality of single utterances, optimizing dialogue ﬂow is a
wide open problem as well.
Consistency A general problem of generative models to-
day is that, although at ﬁrst glance the text looks human, and
language modeling at the token level looks very accurate,
generating longer contexts typically exposes its ﬂaws. While
current systems are quite good at staying on topic (Radford et
al., 2019), perhaps because they still do not really understand
what they are saying they may contradict themselves subtly
or non-subtly in subsequent sentences, e.g. “Arsenal won the
premiership for the ﬁrst time this year” in one sentence and
“Arsenal have won the premiership again this year” further
on. While this topic is so far less studied directly in dialogue,
the task of natural language inference (NLI) poses such un-
derstanding as a classiﬁcation problem (entails, neutral or
contradicts) and progress has been made in this area (Welleck
et al., 2019). Perhaps the most direct use of this research in
dialogue is our work in developing the dialogue NLI dataset
(Welleck et al ., 2019), which directly collects such labels
within the scope of contradicting utterances in multi-turn
conversations, see Figure 5. We showed that training on such
data and applying it as a reranker for a retrieval model de-
creases the number of contradicting utterances – across three
test sets, an average of 3x fewer contradictions were observed
– while humans rated these models as more consistent and
less contradictory. A ﬁrst step in applying this same work to
a generative model instead is performed in Li et al .(2020) by
applying unlikelihood training, which was described in the
previous section.
Open problems . The latter work increased consistency
by applying a classiﬁer as a post-processing operation, and
within a limited domain (the Persona-Chat task, from which
the Dialogue NLI dataset is derived). Future work should
embed such understanding directly in the model itself so
that it understands not to make these mistakes, and such
understanding should generalize across many tasks. A general
problem in NLI is the concern that classiﬁers are performing
well by picking up on biases and shallow features rather than
having fundamental understanding, and the same concerns
apply here as well (Gururangan et al ., 2018; Poliak et al .,
2018).
Memory Current research often does not address many
aspects of memory. This is due to both our current model
architectures (e.g. Transformers which condition on a small
amount of input text) and our data collection procedures (e.g.
crowdsourcing short conversations between strangers). Dia-
logue history is typically truncated to a few turns, a “goldﬁsh
memory” approach, and even there our models do not ex-
hibit a clear grasp of their use, e.g. the consistency issues we
discussed before.
The current approaches to using long-term knowledge are
either graph representations (Moon et al ., 2019a) or unstruc-
tured text retrieval (Chen et al ., 2017; Dodge et al ., 2016;
Dinan et al ., 2019b), which is then prepended onto the dia-
logue history and attended over, an approach advocated by
the memory networks architectures (Weston, Chopra, and
Bordes, 2014; Dinan et al ., 2019b). These approaches have
been effective at answering questions about long-term facts
(Chen et al ., 2017), discussing topics in depth (Dinan et al .,
2019b), and some work explores recalling long-term personal
memories as well (Moon et al ., 2019b). For example, DrQA
(Chen et al ., 2017) proposed the machine reading at scale
framework of retrieving from a large unstructured knowl-
edge base, and then performing machine reading to answer
the question, e.g. using OpenSQuAD. Wizard of Wikipedia
(Dinan et al ., 2019b), mentioned before, proposed a similar
retrieval framework but for multi-turn dialogue about a topic,
retrieving from Wikipedia on each turn to both answer ques-
tions, ask question, and respond to statements, see Figure 2.
Open problems . Much of this area is still open. While the
latter described ﬁxed knowledge base approaches are effec-
tive at utilizing static long-term facts, they miss two important
points. Firstly, that new memories are created all the time,
i.e. there should be a write as well as a read operation. We
are missing both architectures, datasets and benchmarks to
train and evaluate such models. Secondly, if knowledge is
only read for a particular short-term goal and never distilled,
we may limit generalization and learning. While in machine
learning some read, write memory architectures have beendeveloped (Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka, 2014; Henaff
et al., 2017) they have mostly not been successful so far at
scaling to realistic large-scale dialogue tasks. While during
training, methods like BERT (Devlin et al ., 2019) do train
over Wikipedia and hence can be shown to condense knowl-
edge bases into their weights (Petroni et al ., 2019) we contend
that this is not the same as reading sentences and learning
a compressed, indexable knowledge base (a memory) that
makes generalizations from them. For example, reading all
the diverse information about Barack Obama and using it to
build an indexable memory where this information is interre-
lated and some conclusions are already stored. Currently, any
conclusions our models do make are simply thrown away –
e.g. the reasoning our QA systems perform every question.
To build up deeper reasoning over time, presumably these
need to be stored and used as building blocks – for the model
to stand on its own shoulders and think (slightly more) gi-
ant thoughts. This also links memory tocontinual learning ,
which was discussed previously as an important aim.
Commonsense & Reasoning Much of the work in con-
versational agents does not address reasoning directly, other
than that which is implicitly required to perform the tasks
proposed. For task-oriented dialogue, that ranges from un-
derstanding user utterances, to searching databases to ﬁnd
matches (Bordes, Boureau, and Weston, 2017). Question-
answering, which can be thought of as a single turn task is
similar, either requiring reading comprehension (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016) or retrieval as well in the more realistic case
(Nguyen et al ., 2016; Chen et al ., 2017). Although potentially
any amount of reasoning is required to propose a response,
many such tasks end up with sophisticated word overlap
methods providing strong baselines (Chen, Bolton, and Man-
ning, 2016). Nevertheless, when data is in domain, systems
can be built that are successful on these tasks.
NLP researchers have thus sought to address reasoning
more directly in order to evaluate and develop systems fur-
ther. To do this one direction they have studied is artiﬁcial
tasks involving controlled reasoning on toy problems in order
to develop more sophisticated architectures (Weston et al .,
2015). This line of investigation proved to be the ﬁrst success-
ful demonstration of multiple layers of attention for reasoning
with text (Weston, Chopra, and Bordes, 2014; Sukhbaatar et
al., 2015) which has now become part of the defacto method
(Vaswani et al ., 2017). Considerable resources have also been
invested in developing much larger and more natural crowd-
sourced benchmarks such as natural language inference (NLI)
tasks (Bowman et al ., 2015; Williams, Nangia, and Bowman,
2018; Nie et al ., 2020) and commonsense reasoning tasks
(Zellers et al ., 2019; Qin et al ., 2019a). Good progress is
being made on these tasks, although questions still remain
about how much true generalization is actually occurring
(Glockner, Shwartz, and Goldberg, 2018; Gururangan et al .,
2018). Recently, an attempt to avoid such biases has been
made by collecting such tasks in rounds, where humans ad-
versarially try to ﬁnd the ﬂaws in the models, so that they can
be ﬁxed (Nie et al., 2020).
Open problems . Much of the work on reasoning within
the ﬁeld of NLP has so far not been transferred to dialogue
systems or language generation in general. A clear step is
thus to make progress in that direction. One intriguing possi-
bility is to apply apply likelihood and unlikelihood training
to dialogue generation by rewarding correct reasoning and
penalizing incorrect reasoning (Li et al., 2020).
Multimodality and Grounding Language is of course of-
ten used to express concepts relating to the world we live in,
which we perceive with our eyes, ears and other senses. Thus,
grounding language to other modalities should help to learn
the underlying meaning of language, and to connect to human
usage. Practically, an engaging conversational agent should
also be able to discuss these other senses – for example, the
contents of an image or a video. Work in this area encom-
passes image captioning (Lin et al ., 2014), video captioning
(Yu et al ., 2016), visual QA (Antol et al ., 2015), and more
conversationally, visual dialogue (Das et al ., 2017). Embod-
ied agents that use language are also being explored (Das et
al., 2018; Savva et al ., 2019; Szlam et al ., 2019; Urbanek et
al., 2019).
In terms of open-domain conversation, the most relevant vi-
sual tasks are natural conversations grounded in images, such
as Image-Chat (Shuster et al ., 2018) and Image Grounded
Conversations (Mostafazadeh et al ., 2017). When people en-
gage with one another and talk about what they see around
them, they don’t make neutral observations — they express
their points of view. Image-Chat is a large 187k dialogue
dataset of human-human conversations about images where
the speakers incorporate given personalities, see Figure 6. In
that work an architecture is developed, named TransResNet,
that projects the image, personality, and caption in the same
space using image (ResNet), personality, and text (Trans-
former) encoders. The best system is able to produce dialogue
that is close to matching human performance in terms of en-
gagement and relevance. Annotators preferred the model’s
captions on the ﬁrst turn over captions written by people
49.5 percent of the time. Recent work also shows that we
can combine both nonconversational multimodal data and
conversational multimodal data to obtain strong performance
on both (Ju et al., 2019).
Open problems . There is deﬁnitely less work between
modalities, e.g. language and vision, than there is of work
within a single modality – so there is much research to be
done. We believe adding these modalities may enable conver-
sational agents to be actually engaging – as language alone
does not connect so clearly with the user’s direct experience.
While most of this article concerns building a disembodied
conversational agent, such an agent could still ‘see’ for exam-
ple by the user sending it images. In the long-term, embodied
agents either in virtual worlds or the real world via robots
will be part of the picture too.
Personality Humans are strongly affected by the use of
personality in language, and such language can be found to
be engaging, winning over the hearts of users, independent
of its other merits, such as achieving an explicit goal.
HIGH-SPIRITED
Those are the most beautiful ﬁreworks I have 
ever seen!
CULTURED
Fireworks have been used in our celebrations 
for centuries.
ARROGANT
Fireworks are overrated and loud.
HUMBLE
I’m so grateful for whoever invented ﬁreworks.SKEPTICAL
That’s a lot of ﬁreworks, there’s no way they 
set them oﬀ at once.Attitude type Dialogue
Fireworks have been 
used in our celebrations 
for centuries.
Figure 6: Conversations about Images: Image-Chat (Shuster
et al., 2018)
.
Initial attempts at training agents on dialogue data to cap-
ture personality, e.g. from OpenSubtitles movie dialogues
or Twitter showed such models could express personality,
but were an amalgam of all the personalities in the training
set. For example asking “what do you do for a living” and
“what is your job?” a single agent would answer two different
professions (Vinyals and Le, 2015), related to the consistency
discussion above. In order to solve this two strategies have
been tried: trying to learn to model the personality as part of
the learned weights given the speaker id from the data (Li et
al., 2016), or providing training data with explicit personality
information. The latter is the subject of the Persona-Chat
dataset (Zhang et al ., 2018), which consists of 1155 crowd-
sourced personas, written as 5 or more sentences describing a
given character, e.g. “I love horror movies.”, and 11k two-way
conversations between randomly paired characters. A second,
larger but noisier, dataset where a similar type of setup has
been constructed from pushshift.io Reddit has also been built
(Mazar ´e et al ., 2018; Baumgartner et al ., 2020). Persona-Chat
was the subject of study of the ConvAI2 NeurIPS 2018 com-
petition, and so is well studied by several groups (Dinan et
al., 2020).
A different view of personality, rather than speciﬁc tastes
and interests, is character behavior in terms of personality
traits, e.g. sweet, old-fashioned or frivolous. The Image-Chat
dataset, similarly to Persona-Chat, collects paired conversa-
tions with crowdworkers but this time asked to play the role
of 215 such traits (Shuster et al ., 2018). The results show
models are able to mimic such traits well with such super-
vised data, and that they strongly affect user engagement. For
example, captions conditioned on a personality were found
to be signiﬁcantly more engaging than neutral captions, with
a win rate of 64.5% (Shuster et al., 2018).
While some developers have chosen to use ﬁxed personali-
ties in their bots, such as Xiaoice, which has the personality
of a young woman (Shum, He, and Li, 2018; Zhou et al .,
2020), we believe it is better for a bot to be able to adapt a
multitude of personalities (Zhang et al ., 2018; Mazar ´e et al .,
2018). Although this increases complexity, and prevents the
use of well-curated copywriting, it offers a richer environ-
ment to research ideas about cognition, and enables bots with
richer and more varied backgrounds. Furthermore, the ideal
conversational partner is different for each user, which they
may wish to choose or adapt to their desires.
Open problems . While some research progress has been
made in an agent following a given speciﬁed personality, the
ability to generalize from the basic description, e.g. if it likes
one heavy metal band or one ﬂavor of ice cream, does it like
others, has still more or less not been evaluated. Modeling
these changing over time is also more or less unexplored,
being difﬁcult to study in the short conversation setup which
is currently employed. Overall the consistency of the person-
ality has the same issues as other types of consistency, which
we discussed previously. Finally, while we can condition on
a given personality, which one of these should be matched to
be engaging to a particular user, which would clearly bring
gains in terms of engaging content, is also less studied.
Being Personal We make a distinction between an agent
displaying personality, above, and being personal in its con-
versation, which we discuss here, sometimes called being
personalized . Between humans, personal connection is im-
portant in order to build a relationship with a conversation
partner. In the beginning of a relationship, conversations of-
ten focus on simple questions about ourselves: Who are you?
Where do you work? Do you have a family? Answers to these
questions often drive the remainder of a conversation, as the
purpose of such questions is typically to ﬁnd common ground
or interests. The Persona-Chat dataset directly tries to model
this (Zhang et al., 2018).
Open problems . As relationships develop, users will ex-
pect a model (or person!) to maintain a reasonable degree
of continuity in just how personal the conversation is. In-
deed, end-to-end chatbots are often embarrassingly forgetful,
and unable to maintain even simple attributes (like a name)
across multiple turns, let alone many sessions, which links to
memory . Connecting dialogue research to recommendation
systems research which deals with personalization also seems
a clear link that should be solidiﬁed further (Dodge et al .,
2016; Kang et al., 2019).
Putting It All Together In order to adapt to the possibili-
ties of different users and situations, all of the above aspects
are important. Each of the individual aspects necessary for
a conversational agent has unsolved, open problems, as we
have described. Yet, even solving those individual problems
will still leave the most important piece – putting them alto-
gether into a coherent whole.
To that end, a small step towards that goal has been
attempted by building a 12 dialogue task challenge, do-
deca Dialogue (Shuster et al ., 2020). The challenge includes
diverse tasks which incorporate knowledge (expertness), per-
sonality, and multimodality (images), covering some of the
aspects described here. The promise is that multi-tasking on
these tasks can potentially provide a single agent capable
of all these skills, and our initial experiments indicate this
might be possible. Taking this further, more aspects should
be incorporated into such a single system, and improved
model architectures should be developed that leverage these
disparate aspects into a uniﬁed whole. For example, Smith etHuman BlenderBot 9.4B
If you could have dinner with one person, dead or alive, who would
that be?
That's a tough one. I think I'd have to go with Steve Jobs. I'd love to
pick his brain.
Ah, interesting choice. What do you know about Steve Jobs?
He was one of the most inﬂuential people in the history of
technology. He was a visionary.
What questions would you ask him?
I'd want to know how he came up with the idea for the iPod. It was
so revolutionary at the time.
Totally...the iPod changed the way everyone listens to music.
It really did. It's crazy to think that it was released in 2001. That was
a long time ago.
Omg wow, that makes me feel old!
I know, right? Time ﬂies by so fast. I wish I could go back to those
simpler times.
Me too, friend, me too. Speaking of music, what's your favorite
album to listen to lately?
I've been listening to a lot of Led Zeppelin lately. They're my favorite
band.
Figure 7: Conversation between a human and the BlenderBot
model from (Roller et al., 2020).
al.(2020) showed that retrieval models can seamlessly weave
multiple behaviors and skills in a single conversation, includ-
ing knowledgeability, personality, and empathy, by building
the dataset Blended Skill Talk (BST). Such models were
strongly preferred by humans over those which were only
able to perform any individual skill. BlenderBot (Roller et al .,
2020) used the same strategy, ﬁrst pre-training on social me-
dia data, and then ﬁne-tuning large generative models on BST
(with either 90M, 2.7B or 9.4B parameters). A cherry-picked
conversation between a human and the 9.4B model is shown
in Figure 7. For more examples, including lemon-picked
examples, we refer readers to that paper.
While engagingness is necessary for people to be willing
to talk to a conversational agent, it is not sufﬁcient: Tay (Neff
and Nagy, 2016; Miller, Wolf, and Grodzinsky, 2017) is an
example of agent that might have been engaging, but in a
way that required its removal. We now discuss points that are
additional requirements for a well-behaved conversational
agent.
Well-Behaved
An important quality for a conversational agent is to treat
people the way they want to be treated. This can mean not
spamming them with a deluge of unwanted messages, which
is most easily accomplished by generally letting people initi-
ate interactions. But there are also more speciﬁc caveats to
take into consideration.
Offensive and Toxic Content Avoiding anything that
would offend people, in terms of controversial topics, opin-
ions, or language, while remaining engaging, is a very dif-
ﬁcult problem. Dinan et al .(2019a) showed that it is possi-
FEELS PROUD
Congrats, that’s great!INAPPROPRIATE
What? How could you get promoted?Inferred feelings Dialogue
I finally got promoted 
at work!
Congrats, that’s great!Figure 8: Empathetic dialogue (Rashkin et al., 2019).
ble to use a human-in-the-loop iterative adversarial design
to improve a conversational agent along that axis through
carefully designed crowdsourcing, which improved metrics
on different toxic content detection tasks and made models
much more robust to adversarial attacks over three rounds of
iterative reﬁnement. Another ﬁnding was that the dialogue
context where an utterance appears is an important part of
what makes it offensive. Other works have attempted to con-
trol for the toxicity of models by removing offensive content
from the training data (Zhang et al ., 2019; Adiwardana et
al., 2020) or training objectives (He and Glass, 2019). It was
shown in Roller et al .(2020) that ﬁne-tuning on crowdworker
data where workers are instructed not to use toxic language,
compared to pre-training on social media data, provides less
toxic models.
Open problems . Humans are very adaptable when it comes
to circumventing ﬁlters and safeguards (Dinan et al ., 2019a).
This is one more reason why continual learning is important.
However, there is currently a lack of deep understanding of
what makes something offensive or objectionable to someone.
Another aspect that is currently missing is how to predict peo-
ple’s individual preferences, both in terms of where they draw
the line between what is funny if slightly irreverent, and what
is offensive, or what is approachable, engaging language, and
what is inappropriate slang. Promising methods for controlled
text generation (See et al ., 2019) and text rewriting (Lample
et al., 2019; Smith et al ., 2019) could be reﬁned to provide
models more personally tailored to individual preferences,
but are still not mature enough for that application. Another
promising route would be to train policies to avoid offen-
sive or toxic utterances through reinforcement learning: toxic
comment classiﬁers could be used to supply a reward signal
and shape the conversation at a longer range than through
mere on-the-ﬂy suppression. But again, it may lead to un-
desirable outcomes that models learn to only talk about the
weather or bland topics, so reward objectives would have to
be balanced carefully.
Empathy and Compassion Interactions with others are
received more positively and have better outcomes when
they include some level of empathy (Wentzel, 1997; Levin-
son, Gorawara-Bhat, and Lamb, 2000; Bickmore and Cassell,
2001; Kim, Kaplowitz, and Johnston, 2004; Fraser, Papaioan-nou, and Lemon, 2018), taken loosely as recognizing and
acknowledging when the conversation partner displays some
emotion, and responding in a caring and compassionate man-
ner. This is especially necessary in open-domain conversation,
which often revolves around situations that led to the expe-
rience of emotions. Since humans tend to engage with ma-
chines in a social way (Reeves and Nass, 1996; Lee, Kiesler,
and Forlizzi, 2010), it is important for conversational agents
to be able to respond with empathy. Rashkin et al .(2019)
proposes a benchmark and crowdsourced dataset of conversa-
tions between workers talking about situations corresponding
to a balanced set of emotions, to gauge how empathetic exist-
ing models are, and shows that training models on that data
yields models that are rated as more empathetic.
Open problems . While demonstrating empathy and care is
an important objective, it is unclear how to balance it with
other objectives such as informing or entertaining. While
crowdworker conversations exist that contain multiple skills
(Smith et al ., 2020), these may not reﬂect the optimal bal-
ance we wish a ﬁnal trained bot to exhibit. It is also unclear
whether different people prefer different levels of empathy,
and whether this individual preference could be inferred from
spontaneous choices of conversation topics (e.g., does the
mention of a personal situation signal a need for empathetic
responding?) or otherwise signalled. If there is no universally
optimal level of empathy, a natural objective would be to be
able to control to what extent a given model shows empathy,
depending on the conversational context and partner.
Privacy Preserving people’s privacy is a central aspect of
any deployed conversational agent. One approach that we
have followed when deploying bot games is to frame the
conversation as an artiﬁcial game where players are assigned
personas (Zhang et al ., 2018), thus shielding their true pri-
vate information through role-playing. This is a continuation
of the approach taken in multiple papers using role-played
situations (Rashkin et al ., 2019), assigned traits (Shuster et
al., 2018, 2019), assigned movie preferences (Kang et al .,
2019), or even an entire fantasy universe (Urbanek et al .,
2019; Prabhumoye et al., 2020).
Open problems . Relying on role-playing and publicly avail-
able data creates a potential distribution mismatch problem,
where it is unclear whether people are talking about the same
things and in the same way as if they were truly having a
normal private one-on-one conversation. This makes the cre-
ation of public benchmarks difﬁcult. If improvement of an
agent trained on role-played and public data correlates well
with increased satisfaction with private conversations, then
this would be a good sign that we can keep focusing training
efforts on that regime. Another avenue would be to explore
using privacy-preserving libraries such as CrypTen3and de-
centralized approaches such as federated learning (Kone ˇcn´y
et al., 2016) to handle learning from non-public data. Locally
personalizing a shared model (for example, on a personal
mobile device) with data that would remained siloed on the
personal device could be another way to deploy ﬁne-tuned
3https://github.com/facebookresearch/
crypten
personalized models in a privacy-preserving way. These solu-
tions would require drastically down-sizing current models
and making them efﬁcient and small enough that they could
be loaded on device and locally updated without communi-
cating with external servers. Benchmarks could then rely on
gauging people’s satisfaction on their private interaction with
the agent. Our research on more efﬁcient models (Humeau
et al., 2019) is a step in that direction, and so are works that
explore smaller footprints for Transformer-based models, e.g.
through knowledge distillation (Sanh et al ., 2019), adaptive
spans (Sukhbaatar et al ., 2019), or layer pruning (Fan, Grave,
and Joulin, 2019).
Measuring Success
Evaluation of Natural Language Generation remains a
broadly unsolved problem, with a patchwork of solutions
being used across different domains. The open-ended nature
of generating sequences in a multi-turn setup naturally makes
the task difﬁcult to evaluate – with full evaluation possessing
many of the difﬁculties of the task itself as it requires deep
understanding of the content of the conversation. In this sec-
tion, we describe some of the approaches that have been used
to evaluate dialogue systems, their relative advantages, and a
number of open problems.
Human Evaluations Goal-oriented dialogue systems of-
ten have clear evaluation methodologies, e.g. task completion
can be measured if the correct actions are taken (Hastie, 2012;
Henderson, Thomson, and Williams, 2014; Bordes, Boureau,
and Weston, 2017; El Asri et al ., 2017; Wen et al ., 2017).
Chitchat tasks, such as those discussed in this work, are more
open ended, and instead feature conversations without a pre-
cise goal that can be automatically evaluated. Furthermore,
automatic metrics (discussed below), have not been shown to
have a clear correlation with human evaluations (Liu et al .,
2016; Lowe et al ., 2017). This means the current standard for
all dialogue research involves human trials.
However, there are multiple ways one may choose to eval-
uate the effectiveness of the system, and human judgements
are often difﬁcult to measure. Today, the two most common
evaluation forms for dialogue include single-turn pairwise
evaluation, and multi-turn Likert evaluation.
In single-turn pairwise evaluation (Vinyals and Le, 2015;
Li et al ., 2016), a human evaluator is typically presented
with a full conversational context, and shown two possible
responses, and asked to pick which model they feel is bet-
ter. This test affords the beneﬁts and simplicity of an A/B
test, but fails to take into account any multi-turn aspects of
a conversation. For example, a model which repeats itself
across multiple turns will not be identiﬁed by such a system,
a behavior known to be highly disliked by human evaluators
(See et al ., 2019). It furthermore removes any noise produced
across multiple turns, wherein a system would be required to
ingest its own responses in the conversation history, rather
than some produced by a human (Li, Weston, and Roller,
2019).
Another common evaluation framework is multi-turn Lik-
ert evaluation (Ashwin et al ., 2017; Venkatesh et al ., 2017;Zhang et al ., 2018; Rashkin et al ., 2019; See et al ., 2019; Di-
nan et al ., 2020, 2019b), in which a human evaluator is asked
to discuss with an agent for several minutes, and then evaluate
performance on a Likert (1–5) scale. Such evaluations easily
capture a model’s ability to carry on longer conversations,
and handling of out-of-distribution situations, and therefore
may be preferred over single-turn pairwise evaluations. How-
ever, multi-turn Likert is not without its own difﬁculties: it
is considerably more labor intensive than A/B tests, as it
requires longer and higher-cognitive involvement from the
annotators, and it relies on absolute identiﬁcation rather than
relative discrimination, even though absolute identiﬁcation is
not reliable in humans (Stewart, Brown, and Chater, 2005).
Likert evaluations are often not strong enough to ﬁnd statisti-
cally signiﬁcant differences between some models, making
it difﬁcult to measure incremental improvements (Kulikov
et al., 2019). To make matters worse, it is usually necessary
that one must also re-evaluate the baselines at the same time
as one’s novel model, as the distribution of human annotators
can easily shift over time, causing measurement errors (See et
al., 2019). Another common difﬁculty is related to sequential
effects (e.g., reviewed in Stewart, Brown, and Chater (2005)),
where the ﬁrst system an annotator evaluates can heavily
inﬂuence their future ratings, causing difﬁculties in using an
absolute scale.
Some groups have proposed hybrid approaches between
single-turn pairwise evaluation and multi-turn Likert scoring.
For example, Novikova, Du ˇsek, and Rieser (2018) propose a
method that combines continuous scales and relative assess-
ments, but in single-turn, rather than multi-turn evaluation;
and Adiwardana et al .(2020) propose binary good/bad an-
notations of individual utterances in a multi-turn setting. Li,
Weston, and Roller (2019) recently proposed ACUTE-Eval,
in which evaluators are asked to complete pairwise evalua-
tions of complete dialogues. An example of ACUTE is shown
in Figure 9. This setup affords a number of advantages over
both single-turn pairwise, and multi-turn Likert evaluations.
The explicit use of comparisons remedies many of the is-
sues of sequential effects, while still providing the ability to
expose issues that are present only in multi-turn evaluations.
Furthermore, the pairwise setup facilitates replication and
efﬁcient reuse of data: conversations collected in previous
trials and by other systems can be directly compared with
a new system, without having to recollect additional data.
This can signiﬁcantly reduce the resources needed by a new
evaluation, and ensure that multiple papers are comparing to
prior work consistently.
As a trade-off, ACUTE-Eval does require that one per-
forms twostages of evaluation: one where humans conduct
conversation with a model, and another where third-persons
indicate pairwise preferences. If one has many systems to
compare, this may actually increase resource requirements,
since one must pay the full price of multi-turn collection, and
another of pairwise evaluations. Fortunately, we can reuse the
same dialogue in multiple pairwise comparisons, reducing
the number of conversations required to detect statistical sig-
niﬁcance, alleviating some of the issue. When comparing to
multiple existing systems, the beneﬁt of being able to re-use
old collections outweighs the resource requirements of the
Figure 9: ACUTE-Eval has human annotators directly com-
pare multi-turn conversations with different systems.
new collections, mitigating these effects (Li, Weston, and
Roller, 2019).
However, as an alternative, we ﬁnd that ACUTE-Eval can
also work in “self-chat” mode, where models are used for
both sides of a conversation, instead of human-model chat.
This eliminates the requirement of the initial human collec-
tion, and conversations may be generated without human in-
volvement, dramatically reducing the resource requirements
of evaluation. We found in our experiments that results from
self-chat experiments highly correlated with those of human-
chat experiments, for most, but not all systems (Li, Weston,
and Roller, 2019). This mirrors other successes in using self-
play, self-chat, and simulated users to evaluate dialogue sys-
tems (Fazel-Zarandi et al ., 2017; Shah et al ., 2018a,b; Wei et
al., 2018; Ghandeharioun et al., 2019).
Automatic metrics Evaluation of chitchat tasks with au-
tomatic metrics is difﬁcult precisely because of their open-
ended nature. For example, the answer to the question “What
are you doing tonight?” has many possible answers, each
with little word overlap. This means standard metrics based
on word-overlap with reference responses, as frequently used
in question-answering (Rajpurkar et al ., 2016) or machine
translation (Papineni et al ., 2002), do not work well, and have
poor correlation with human judgments (Liu et al ., 2016;
Novikova et al ., 2017; Lowe et al ., 2017). Nevertheless, a
number of studies do report automatic metrics, sometimes
without human studies (Lowe et al ., 2015; Serban et al ., 2016;
Parthasarathi and Pineau, 2018). Some commonly used word-
overlap metrics include F1 (Rajpurkar et al ., 2016), BLEU
(Papineni et al., 2002; Li et al., 2017c), ROUGE (Lin, 2004;Fan et al ., 2019), CIDEr (Vedantam, Zitnick, and Parikh,
2015; Zhou et al ., 2020), and METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie,
2005; Zhou et al ., 2020). Each covers slightly different as-
pects, and may be more appropriate in speciﬁc situations, but
none is known to be a perfect evaluation of conversational
models.
More specialized metrics may be used for speciﬁc subtypes
of conversational AI systems. For example, ranking models
are often evaluated using Recall @ K or Top-1 Accuracy
(Zhang et al ., 2018; Dinan et al ., 2019b, 2020; Humeau et al .,
2019). These can be used as rough proxies for improvements,
but the open nature of dialogue means that there may be many
valid answers in a given candidate list. Such metrics are also
unable to capture how well a model will generalize to new
situations.
Similarly, generative models typically report perplexity of
a held-out test set (e.g. Li et al .(2017c); Dinan et al .(2020);
Shuster et al .(2020); Fan et al .(2019); Adiwardana et al .
(2020); Roller et al .(2020)), and recent work has even found
perplexity correlates strongly with human evaluations within
the same model class (Adiwardana et al ., 2020). While per-
plexity does give a good estimate of the probability that a
generative model would produce the gold label, such results
may be actually quite rare under beam search (Fan, Grangier,
and Auli, 2018; Holtzman et al ., 2019; Welleck et al ., 2020),
and not representative of an actual generation of a model un-
der beam search or sampling. Perplexity also depends on the
dictionary, and not all models will necessarily have entirely
comparable perplexities, especially when unknown words
are present in validation or test labels, making it difﬁcult to
compare systems across multiple time horizons (Dinan et al .,
2020). Modern model using BPE dictionaries further compli-
cate complications of comparing perplexities across multiple
systems (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch, 2016). Specialized
systems, which focus on improving speciﬁc behaviors of gen-
erative models, might instead focus on specialized metrics
that are not indicative of overall generation quality, but in-
stead on specialized behavior like repetition (See et al ., 2019;
Welleck et al ., 2020; Li et al ., 2020) or vocabulary usage (See
et al., 2019; Holtzman et al ., 2019; Li et al ., 2020). Altering
the behavior of the generation method can dramatically in-
ﬂuence human evaluations, while maintaining identical or
near-identical perplexity (See et al ., 2019; Welleck et al .,
2020, 2019; Adiwardana et al., 2020; Roller et al., 2020).
Noting the inadequacy of each of these automatic metrics,
a number of researchers have proposed learning metrics for
dialogue evaluation (Lowe et al ., 2017; Ghandeharioun et
al., 2019). Typically, this is done via a regression from a
number of automatically-extracted features (e.g. sentiment
and semantic similarity) to human evaluations. In particular,
Ghandeharioun et al .(2019) perform such correlations us-
ing features extracted via self-play of models. Such systems
provide a promise of improved speed of research and devel-
opment of dialogue agents, but so far have not been met with
wide adoption. A common point of criticism is that there can
be little effective difference between a learned metric and
one that is used as an actual model for performing utterance
selection. Put another way, one can easily maximize a metric
by employing methods like ranking all utterances according
to a learned metric, or using Monte Carlo Tree Search (Ku-
magai et al ., 2016) during generation to na ¨ıvely optimize the
automatic metric. In this manner, the problem of learning an
automatic metric is difﬁcult to disentangle from the rest of
dialogue research.
Open problems . Selection of an automatic metric for di-
alogue research, or natural language generation in general,
remains a widely open problem that attracts many researchers.
Despite concerns, we remain optimistic about methods which
approach the problem via learning. Future work may addi-
tionally consider holistic evaluations, which require the full
conversation to complete before being able to make an indi-
vidual prediction. This may help mitigate concerns around
using the metric to drive dialogue selection. Similarly, adver-
sarial networks may provide a potential avenue for improv-
ing automatic selection via continually improved detection
of compute-generated responses. In the short term, shared
tasks may offer the best avenue to ﬁnding automatic metrics
which correlate with human judgements (Ashwin et al ., 2017;
Dinan et al ., 2020; Yoshino et al ., 2018), but also rely on
a diversity of submitted systems in order to consider such
evaluations. If all participants use similar models with similar
pretraining using similar corpora, then we should not expect
clear distinctions to be made apparent in shared tasks.
Behavioral Metrics Yet more alternatives are available as
models are deployed to real users, especially behavioral met-
rics. For example, in the Alexa Prize, models were evaluated
by how many turns were completed before a conversation
was abandoned (Ashwin et al ., 2017). Others might be eval-
uated by the retention rate of users (e.g. how many users
choose to have a second or third conversation with a model).
Such behavioral metrics can be powerful implicit indicators
of preferences of users, but have a large number of issues. For
example, models which frequently ask for clariﬁcation will
naturally result in more turns of conversation, but naturally
frustrate users; systems which initiate a conversation will
have higher retention, but may not be appreciated by users.
A careful and thoughtful balance of allowed behaviors must
be employed, and researchers should feel discouraged from
using “engagement hacks.”
Open problems . There is signiﬁcant question as to what
are the correct implicit behavioral metrics to collect, and
what few methods exist now depend heavily on the medium
and design of the system. As more models are deployed to
the wild, we encourage researchers to share their successes
and best practices so that the community may come to a
consensus.
Discussion It is likely that all of the above (human evalu-
ations, automatic metrics, and behavioral metris) and more,
will need to be measured with some granularity, in order to
understand trade-offs of different behaviors and attributes.
In the short term, deployed models should likely focus on
retention, in order to ensure a steady stream of users to afford
experimentation and iteration.Discussion
In this section, we strive to enumerate our core research
and ethical values. We discuss how we prioritize trade-offs
in our decisions, as well as lessons internalized from our
experiences with different steps in the development process.
We end on reﬂections of trends in the community, and calls
for action within the community.
Values and Guiding Principles
One primary principle behind our work is openness . We
strive, whenever possible, that the ﬁndings of our research
should be shared freely via publications whenever it provides
beneﬁt. Furthermore, the items necessary to reproduction of
our results should additionally be made public when possi-
ble. This includes pretrained models, but also code and data
necessary to reproduce these results. We believe that siloed
research inhibits progress of the ﬁeld, and point to the recent
radical improvements in the NLP community stemming from
the openness of the publication of Transformers (Vaswani et
al., 2017) and explosion of following open models (Devlin et
al., 2019; Lample and Conneau, 2019; Dai et al ., 2019; Yang
et al., 2019; Liu et al ., 2019). With the trend of pretraining
coming to dominate the ﬁeld, open datasets are more impor-
tant than ever. Our own data, models, and code will are made
public via ParlAI4(Miller et al., 2017), our uniﬁed platform
for dialogue research. Our current best approach, BlenderBot
(Roller et al., 2020) is available there.
Indeed, our uniﬁed platform additionally propels our sec-
ond value: swiftness . In the past few years, the NLP commu-
nity has been radically changed via massive improvements
to the availability of compute and data. Reacting and improv-
ing upon the most state-of-the-art work will be important to
the success of open-domain conversational agents. We have
found ParlAI to be important to remaining swift during these
times of rapid development. By providing a uniﬁed platform
for collection of data, implementation of models, evaluation
of agents, and deployment of agents, we are able to signif-
icantly reduce development time. For example, our recent
development of Polyencoders (Humeau et al ., 2019) required
no modiﬁcation to be evaluated using our new evaluation
framework (Li, Weston, and Roller, 2019).
We also prioritize privacy as a value in our research. On-
line chats are often where our most intimate and sensitive
discussion happens, and one may imagine that users may
be even more uninhibited in their interactions with bot. As
such, we must act responsibly with respect to data releases.
This means that all users must be provided informed consent
around how their conversations will be used. Furthermore,
we should only release anonymized versions of data, and
make every effort to ensure that sensitive data is not included
in public releases. Indeed, we must always value privacy
over openness and swiftness, whenever our values are in di-
rect conﬂict with one another. However, we believe that we
can have all three values at once: for example, games with
role-playing aspects, like Beat-the-Bot, have mitigated the
likelihood of sensitive information being included in a con-
versation, and enable us to open-source the data. In future
4https://parl.ai
deployments, we will also add a private mode to appropri-
ate selections, which disables logging and data collection.
We also hope that federated learning (Kone ˇcn´y et al ., 2016)
and other privacy-oriented machine learning techniques will
enable future variants to perform learning in a privacy-ﬁrst
manner.
Our Experiences
We have internalized a number of lessons from experiences
with training and releasing models.
Pretraining First, we have found that pretraining is impor-
tant to performance for nearly every variant of chitchat we
have experimented with (Wolf et al ., 2019b; Dinan et al .,
2020), including both in retrieval (Humeau et al ., 2019) and
generative methods (Shuster et al ., 2020; Zhang et al ., 2019;
Adiwardana et al ., 2020; Roller et al ., 2020). Furthermore,
we have consistently found that domain-speciﬁc pretraining
is important to high performance: that is, using dialogue-
like pretraining signiﬁcantly outperforms generic pretraining
on resources like Wikipedia and BooksCorpus (Dinan et al .,
2019b; Humeau et al ., 2019; Dinan et al ., 2019a, 2020). This
further underscores the importance that our models should
be openly available, in order to ensure researchers with fewer
computational resources are still able to conduct high-quality
research. Such efforts are important to ensuring pretraining
acts as a rising tide, rather than protectionism for the groups
with the most resources.
Efﬁciency Even groups with large computational resources
will ﬁnd that models must be computationally accessible in
order to be deployed on a wide scale. Deployed models need
to run on commodity hardware, without access to GPUs
or TPUs. Indeed, this was the core motivation behind the
development of Polyencoders (Humeau et al ., 2019). As a
rule of thumb, a researcher should be able to communicate
with her model in real-time on a mid-tier laptop, with zero
additional development effort. This restriction ensures that
we are developing models that are able to be deployed easily.
Furthermore, since automatic metrics are untrustworthy in
dialogue, it also ensures that a researcher can manually test
her model, understanding its power and limitations. Although
the recent trend in NLP is to train larger models requiring
GPUs for inference Devlin et al .(2019); Liu et al .(2019);
Radford et al .(2019); Zhang et al .(2019); Adiwardana et
al.(2020), methods for more efﬁcient inference and smarter
algorithms provide ways to retain performance while keeping
high performance (Sanh et al ., 2019; Fan, Grave, and Joulin,
2019; Humeau et al., 2019).
Best practices We have also adopted a number of soft-
ware engineering best practices around our development pro-
cess. In particular, we have found automatic testing and con-
tinuous integration to be invaluable to our developments.
We regularly verify our released models perform as ex-
pected, allowing us to readily identify and remedy backwards-
compatibility issues. High quality code reviews, even during
early model prototypes, have helped us identify bugs andmisunderstandings in our models early and sped up develop-
ment. Universal usage of a shared platform ParlAI (Miller et
al., 2017) has ensured that we maintain a consistent level of
quality across multiple projects, and that we can minimize
efforts around reproduction and guarantee performance and
longevity of models. Many of these beneﬁts are obvious and
well-known to software engineers, but are easily forgotten
and ignored in research.
Deployment In contrast to development of models, deploy-
ment has presented us with a very different set of lessons.
There are a number of major engineering complications in-
volved whenever games require the involvement of twoor
more humans, as in Beat-the-Bot; these run antithetical to
usual scaling recommendations like sharding. Slowness in
pairing can signiﬁcantly frustrate users, and cause them to
abandon the game, further exacerbating the issue. Further-
more, users want the game to react instantly, but wish to
take their time in responding. The result is that users may be
more satisﬁed with games and interactions that do not require
another human to be present.
We have also found that deploying models has resulted in
a consistent and steady stream of adversarial users (“trolls”).
This is highly unsuprising, as shown by the legacy of Mi-
crosoft’s Taybot (Neff and Nagy, 2016; Miller, Wolf, and
Grodzinsky, 2017). Interestingly, we found that adversarial
users had a tendency to assume that they were training the bot
online, similar to Microsoft Tay, and believed the bot would
learn to mimic their suggested responses quickly. These users
focused heavily on suggesting highly offensive responses,
especially to innocent and common questions. Other adver-
saries focused on asking sensitive questions in hopes the bot
would produce an offensive response, with the intention of
publicizing the bot’s failures. Both of these experiences em-
phasize the importance of the safety of responses, especially
around the need for safety-in-context. They also demonstrate
the signiﬁcant risks in online learning, and why it must be
deployed with extreme caution and safeguards.
Recommendations to the Community
Based on our experiences and view of open problems, there
are a number of recommendations we suggest to the commu-
nity, in hopes of encouraging development while continuing
the pursuit of open and accessible science.
Shared Tasks We urge the community to rally behind a
deﬁnitive set of tasks and measurements for conducting en-
gaging chitchat research. The current state of the fractured
community makes it difﬁcult to compare works, despite hav-
ing similar domain and purpose. Recent competitions, such
as the ConvAI2 challenge (Dinan et al ., 2020) and the DSTC7
challenge (Yoshino et al ., 2018), stand as excellent models
for such endeavors. As we progress, these challenges must
incorporate more and more difﬁcult challenges encompassing
all of the behaviors that are necessary for the ultimate bot.
We note that our recently developed DodecaDialogue suite
(Shuster et al ., 2020) offers an evaluation framework that
encompasses many of the research challenges discussed in
this document, and encourage the rest of the community to
employ it.
Such standardized tasks should also include real, interac-
tive learning systems, such as those developed in the Alexa
Prize competition (Ashwin et al ., 2017). We hope that future
iterations will also provide for more liberal open data and
participation. We believe these are an excellent way for re-
search to progress, and encourage these continue and expand.
Naturally, this is complicated by the number of open research
problems, such as what is the correct way to do automatic
evaluation of systems.
Software As we standardize on data, groups may see addi-
tional beneﬁt from standardizing on software stacks as well.
Our ParlAI (Miller et al ., 2017)5framework attempts to in-
tegrate standardized data, released models and software as a
one-stop solution and its wide adoption by the community
has created an ecosystem of improved support, feature de-
velopment, and engineering improvements. Our openness
to collaborations, contributions, and requests from groups
outside our own organization is a reﬂection of our core be-
lief that sharing research tools is the most productive way to
make fast advances as a ﬁeld.
A number of design principles went into ParlAI, which
we believe have paid repeated dividends and enabled faster
research for ourselves. In particular, ParlAI has focused on
unifying the format of all tasks into simple input-output text
pairs have helped us to treat ensure our systems are highly
reusable, and that different tasks may be easily combined
to produce models which exhibit joint behaviors. We also
attempt to avoid overly-specialized architectures as often as
possible, ensuring our models are also useful across a wide
variety of tasks. Furthermore, we observe that today’s best
models are tomorrow’s baselines, and that the centralized
repository of reproducible and pretrained models and im-
plementations signiﬁcantly lowers the overhead needed to
perform comparisons to prior work.
Perhaps more easily overlooked is the success we have ex-
perienced by enforcing allparts of the system act via a uniﬁed
API of Agents . This means that datasets (teachers), models,
crowdworkers, and actual users are all exposed through a uni-
ﬁed means. As a result, we may move effortlessly and raplidly
progress between Wizard of Oz data collection, model train-
ing, human evaluation, and model deployment.
Other efforts in the software space include RASA (Bock-
lisch et al ., 2017), PolyAI (Henderson et al ., 2019), Uber’s
Plato (Papangelis et al., 2019), Microsoft’s IceCaps (Shiv et
al., 2019), and Huggingface Transformers library (Wolf et al .,
2019a), not focused on dialogue per se, but used as a base in
much dialogue work.
Conclusion
Our research has shown that it is possible to train models
to improve on some of the most common weaknesses of
chatbots today. Over time, we’ll work toward bringing these
5Available at https://parl.aisubtasks together into one uniﬁed intelligent agent by nar-
rowing and eventually closing the gap with human perfor-
mance. In the future, intelligent chatbots will be capable of
open-domain dialogue in a way that’s personable, consistent,
empathetic, and engaging.
As part of our contribution to the broader research com-
munity, we’re sharing our new models, training code, and
data sets within ParlAI (Miller et al ., 2017), our open source
dialogue research platform. We hope that this platform will
continue to foster research advances across the research com-
munity and contribute to pushing dialogue research forward,
addressing many of the open problems we have described
here.
References
Adiwardana, D.; Luong, M.-T.; So, D. R.; Hall, J.; Fiedel, N.;
Thoppilan, R.; Yang, Z.; Kulshreshtha, A.; Nemade, G.;
Lu, Y .; et al. 2020. Towards a human-like open-domain
chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977 .
Antol, S.; Agrawal, A.; Lu, J.; Mitchell, M.; Batra, D.;
Lawrence Zitnick, C.; and Parikh, D. 2015. Vqa: Visual
question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision , 2425–2433.
Ashwin, R.; Rohit, P.; Chandra, K.; Anu, V .; Raefer, G.;
Qing, L.; Jeff, N.; Behnam, H.; Ming, C.; Ashish, N.; Eric,
K.; Kate, B.; Amanda, W.; Yi, P.; Han, S.; Sk, J.; Gene,
H.; and Art, P. 2017. Conversational AI: The science
behind the Adlexa Prize. In Proceedings of Workshop on
Conversational AI .
Baheti, A.; Ritter, A.; Li, J.; and Dolan, B. 2018. Generating
more interesting responses in neural conversation models
with distributional constraints. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing , 3970–3980. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Banerjee, S., and Lavie, A. 2005. METEOR: An automatic
metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation with
human judgments. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine
Translation and/or Summarization , 65–72. Ann Arbor,
Michigan: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Baumgartner, J.; Zannettou, S.; Keegan, B.; Squire, M.; and
Blackburn, J. 2020. The pushshift reddit dataset. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.08435 .
Bickmore, T., and Cassell, J. 2001. Relational agents: a model
and implementation of building user trust. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems , 396–403. ACM.
Bocklisch, T.; Faulkner, J.; Pawlowski, N.; and Nichol, A.
2017. RASA: Open source language understanding and
dialogue management.
Bordes, A.; Boureau, Y .-L.; and Weston, J. 2017. Learning
end-to-end goal-oriented dialog. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations .
Bowman, S. R.; Angeli, G.; Potts, C.; and Manning, C. D.
2015. A large annotated corpus for learning natural lan-
guage inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
632–642. Lisbon, Portugal: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Budzianowski, P.; Wen, T.-H.; Tseng, B.-H.; Casanueva, I.;
Ultes, S.; Ramadan, O.; and Ga ˇsi´c, M. 2018. MultiWOZ -
a large-scale multi-domain wizard-of-Oz dataset for task-
oriented dialogue modelling. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing , 5016–5026. Brussels, Belgium: Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Carlson, A.; Betteridge, J.; Kisiel, B.; Settles, B.; Hruschka,
E. R.; and Mitchell, T. M. 2010. Toward an architecture for
never-ending language learning. In Twenty-Fourth AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Chen, D.; Fisch, A.; Weston, J.; and Bordes, A. 2017. Read-
ing wikipedia to answer open-domain questions. In Pro-
ceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , 1870–1879. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Chen, D.; Bolton, J.; and Manning, C. D. 2016. A thorough
examination of the CNN/daily mail reading comprehen-
sion task. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , 2358–2367. Berlin, Germany: Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Choi, E.; He, H.; Iyyer, M.; Yatskar, M.; Yih, W.-t.; Choi, Y .;
Liang, P.; and Zettlemoyer, L. 2018. QuAC: Question an-
swering in context. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .
Collobert, R.; Puhrsch, C.; and Synnaeve, G. 2016.
Wav2letter: an end-to-end convnet-based speech recog-
nition system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03193 .
Dai, Z.; Yang, Z.; Yang, Y .; Carbonell, J.; Le, Q.; and
Salakhutdinov, R. 2019. Transformer-XL: Attentive lan-
guage models beyond a ﬁxed-length context. In Proceed-
ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , 2978–2988. Florence, Italy:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Das, A.; Kottur, S.; Gupta, K.; Singh, A.; Yadav, D.; Moura,
J. M.; Parikh, D.; and Batra, D. 2017. Visual dialog. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , volume 2.
Das, A.; Datta, S.; Gkioxari, G.; Lee, S.; Parikh, D.; and Batra,
D. 2018. Embodied question answering. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops , 2054–2063.
Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; and Toutanova, K. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , 4171–4186.Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Dinan, E.; Humeau, S.; Chintagunta, B.; and Weston, J.
2019a. Build it break it ﬁx it for dialogue safety: Ro-
bustness from adversarial human attack. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP) , 4537–4546. Hong Kong, China: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Dinan, E.; Roller, S.; Shuster, K.; Fan, A.; Auli, M.; and
Weston, J. 2019b. Wizard of Wikipedia: Knowledge-
powered conversational agents. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations .
Dinan, E.; Logacheva, V .; Malykh, V .; Miller, A.; Shuster,
K.; Urbanek, J.; Kiela, D.; Szlam, A.; Serban, I.; Lowe, R.;
Prabhumoye, S.; Black, A. W.; Rudnicky, A.; Williams,
J.; Pineau, J.; Burtsev, M.; and Weston, J. 2020. The
second conversational intelligence challenge (ConvAI2).
In Escalera, S., and Herbrich, R., eds., The NeurIPS ’18
Competition , 187–208. Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing.
Dodge, J.; Gane, A.; Zhang, X.; Bordes, A.; Chopra, S.;
Miller, A.; Szlam, A.; and Weston, J. 2016. Evaluating
prerequisite qualities for learning end-to-end dialog sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations .
El Asri, L.; Schulz, H.; Sharma, S.; Zumer, J.; Harris, J.;
Fine, E.; Mehrotra, R.; and Suleman, K. 2017. Frames:
a corpus for adding memory to goal-oriented dialogue
systems. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual SIGDIAL
Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue , 207–219. ACL.
Fan, A.; Jernite, Y .; Perez, E.; Grangier, D.; Weston, J.; and
Auli, M. 2019. ELI5: Long form question answering. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 3558–3567. Florence, Italy:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Fan, A.; Grangier, D.; and Auli, M. 2018. Controllable
abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop on Neural Machine Translation and Generation ,
45–54. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Fan, A.; Grave, E.; and Joulin, A. 2019. Reducing trans-
former depth on demand with structured dropout. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations .
Fan, A.; Lewis, M.; and Dauphin, Y . 2018. Hierarchical
neural story generation. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers) , 889–898.
Fang, H.; Cheng, H.; Sap, M.; Clark, E.; Holtzman, A.; Choi,
Y .; Smith, N. A.; and Ostendorf, M. 2018. Sounding board:
A user-centric and content-driven social chatbot. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Demonstrations , 96–100. New Orleans, Louisiana: Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Fazel-Zarandi, M.; Li, S.-W.; Cao, J.; Casale, J.; Henderson,
P.; Whitney, D.; and Geramifard, A. 2017. Learning robust
dialog policies in noisy environments. In Proceedings of
Workshop on Conversational AI .
Fraser, J.; Papaioannou, I.; and Lemon, O. 2018. Spoken
conversational ai in video games: Emotional dialogue man-
agement increases user engagement. In Proceedings of
the 18th International Conference on Intelligent Virtual
Agents , 179–184. ACM.
French, R. M. 1999. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist
networks. Trends in cognitive sciences 3(4):128–135.
Gao, J.; Galley, M.; Li, L.; et al. 2019. Neural approaches to
conversational ai. Foundations and Trends Rin Informa-
tion Retrieval 13(2-3):127–298.
Gehring, J.; Auli, M.; Grangier, D.; Yarats, D.; and Dauphin,
Y . N. 2017. Convolutional sequence to sequence learning.
InProceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning-Volume 70 , 1243–1252. JMLR. org.
Ghandeharioun, A.; Shen, J. H.; Jaques, N.; Ferguson, C.;
Jones, N.; Lapedriza, `A.; and Picard, R. W. 2019. Ap-
proximating interactive human evaluation with self-play
for open-domain dialog systems. Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems .
Ghazvininejad, M.; Shi, X.; Priyadarshi, J.; and Knight, K.
2017. Hafez: an interactive poetry generation system. In
Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations , 43–48.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ghazvininejad, M.; Brockett, C.; Chang, M.-W.; Dolan, B.;
Gao, J.; Yih, W.-t.; and Galley, M. 2018. A knowledge-
grounded neural conversation model. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) .
Glockner, M.; Shwartz, V .; and Goldberg, Y . 2018. Breaking
NLI systems with sentences that require simple lexical
inferences. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers) , 650–655. Melbourne, Australia: Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Graves, A.; Wayne, G.; and Danihelka, I. 2014. Neural turing
machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.5401 .
Gururangan, S.; Swayamdipta, S.; Levy, O.; Schwartz, R.;
Bowman, S.; and Smith, N. A. 2018. Annotation artifacts
in natural language inference data. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , 107–
112. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hancock, B.; Bordes, A.; Mazare, P.-E.; and Weston, J. 2019.
Learning from dialogue after deployment: Feed yourself,
chatbot! In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics , 3667–3684.
Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hastie, H. 2012. Metrics and evaluation of spoken dialogue
systems. In Lemon, O., and Pietquin, O., eds., Data-DrivenMethods for Adaptive Spoken Dialogue Systems . Springer.
131–150.
He, T., and Glass, J. 2019. Negative training for
neural dialogue response generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.02134 .
Henaff, M.; Weston, J.; Szlam, A.; Bordes, A.; and LeCun,
Y . 2017. Tracking the world state with recurrent entity
networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Learning Representations .
Henderson, M.; Budzianowski, P.; Casanueva, I.; Coope,
S.; Gerz, D.; Kumar, G.; Mrk ˇsi´c, N.; Spithourakis, G.;
Su, P.-H.; Vulic, I.; and Wen, T.-H. 2019. A repository
of conversational datasets. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on NLP for Conversational AI . Data available at
github.com/PolyAI-LDN/conversational-datasets.
Henderson, M.; Thomson, B.; and Williams, J. D. 2014. The
second dialog state tracking challenge. In Proceedings of
the 15th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on
Discourse and Dialogue , 263–272.
Hinton, G.; Deng, L.; Yu, D.; Dahl, G.; Mohamed, A.-r.;
Jaitly, N.; Senior, A.; Vanhoucke, V .; Nguyen, P.; Kings-
bury, B.; et al. 2012. Deep neural networks for acoustic
modeling in speech recognition. IEEE Signal processing
magazine 29.
Holtzman, A.; Buys, J.; Forbes, M.; and Choi, Y . 2019. The
curious case of neural text degeneration. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representations .
Huang, M.; Zhu, X.; and Gao, J. 2020. Challenges in building
intelligent open-domain dialog systems. ACM Transac-
tions on Information Systems (TOIS) 38(3):1–32.
Humeau, S.; Shuster, K.; Lachaux, M.; and Weston, J. 2019.
Poly-encoders: Architectures and pre-training strategies
for fast and accurate multi-sentence scoring. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations .
Ju, D.; Shuster, K.; Boureau, Y .-L.; and Weston, J. 2019.
All-in-one image-grounded conversational agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.12394 .
Jurafsky, D., and Martin, J. H. 2019. Speech and lan-
guage processing: An introduction to natural language
processing, computational linguistics, and speech recog-
nition. Draft of October 16th, 2019, Chapter 26. Website:
https://web.stanford.edu/ jurafsky/slp3.
Kang, D.; Balakrishnan, A.; Shah, P.; Crook, P.; Boureau,
Y .-L.; and Weston, J. 2019. Recommendation as a commu-
nication game: Self-supervised bot-play for goal-oriented
dialogue. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , 1951–1961. Hong Kong,
China: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kikuchi, Y .; Neubig, G.; Sasano, R.; Takamura, H.; and
Okumura, M. 2016. Controlling output length in neural
encoder-decoders. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
1328–1338. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kim, S. S.; Kaplowitz, S.; and Johnston, M. V . 2004. The ef-
fects of physician empathy on patient satisfaction and com-
pliance. Evaluation & the health professions 27(3):237–
251.
Kirkpatrick, J.; Pascanu, R.; Rabinowitz, N.; Veness, J.; Des-
jardins, G.; Rusu, A. A.; Milan, K.; Quan, J.; Ramalho, T.;
Grabska-Barwinska, A.; et al. 2017. Overcoming catas-
trophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the
national academy of sciences 114(13):3521–3526.
Kone ˇcn´y, J.; McMahan, H. B.; Yu, F. X.; Richtarik, P.; Suresh,
A. T.; and Bacon, D. 2016. Federated learning: Strate-
gies for improving communication efﬁciency. In NIPS
Workshop on Private Multi-Party Machine Learning .
Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; and Hinton, G. E. 2012. Im-
agenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural net-
works. In Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, 1097–1105.
Kulikov, I.; Miller, A.; Cho, K.; and Weston, J. 2019. Impor-
tance of search and evaluation strategies in neural dialogue
modeling. In Proceedings of the 12th International Con-
ference on Natural Language Generation , 76–87. Tokyo,
Japan: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kumagai, K.; Kobayashi, I.; Mochihashi, D.; Asoh, H.; Naka-
mura, T.; and Nagai, T. 2016. Human-like natural language
generation using monte Carlo tree search. In Proceedings
of the INLG 2016 Workshop on Computational Creativity
in Natural Language Generation , 11–18. Edinburgh, UK:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lample, G., and Conneau, A. 2019. Cross-lingual language
model pretraining. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems .
Lample, G.; Subramanian, S.; Smith, E.; Denoyer, L.; Ran-
zato, M.; and Boureau, Y .-L. 2019. Multiple-attribute text
rewriting. In Proceedings of International Conference on
Learning Representations .
Lee, M. K.; Kiesler, S.; and Forlizzi, J. 2010. Receptionist
or information kiosk: how do people talk with a robot? In
Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer
supported cooperative work , 31–40. ACM.
Levinson, W.; Gorawara-Bhat, R.; and Lamb, J. 2000. A
study of patient clues and physician responses in primary
care and surgical settings. Jama 284(8):1021–1027.
Li, J.; Galley, M.; Brockett, C.; Spithourakis, G. P.; Gao, J.;
and Dolan, B. 2016. A persona-based neural conversation
model. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics , 994–1003.
ACL.
Li, J.; Miller, A. H.; Chopra, S.; Ranzato, M.; and Weston,
J. 2017a. Dialogue learning with human-in-the-loop. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations .
Li, J.; Miller, A. H.; Chopra, S.; Ranzato, M.; and Weston, J.
2017b. Learning through dialogue interactions by askingquestions. In Proceedings of International Conference on
Learning Representations .
Li, Y .; Su, H.; Shen, X.; Li, W.; Cao, Z.; and Niu, S. 2017c.
DailyDialog: A manually labelled multi-turn dialogue
dataset. In Proceedings of The 8th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP
2017) .
Li, M.; Roller, S.; Kulikov, I.; Welleck, S.; Boureau, Y .-L.;
Cho, K.; and Weston, J. 2020. Don’t say that! making in-
consistent dialogue unlikely with unlikelihood training. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics .
Li, M.; Weston, J.; and Roller, S. 2019. ACUTE-EV AL:
Improved dialogue evaluation with optimized questions
and multi-turn comparisons. In NeurIPS workshop on
Conversational AI .
Lin, T.-Y .; Maire, M.; Belongie, S.; Hays, J.; Perona, P.;
Ramanan, D.; Doll ´ar, P.; and Zitnick, C. L. 2014. Microsoft
coco: Common objects in context. In European conference
on computer vision , 740–755. Springer.
Lin, C.-Y . 2004. ROUGE: A package for automatic evalua-
tion of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out ,
74–81. Barcelona, Spain: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Liu, C.-W.; Lowe, R.; Serban, I.; Noseworthy, M.; Charlin, L.;
and Pineau, J. 2016. How NOT to evaluate your dialogue
system: An empirical study of unsupervised evaluation
metrics for dialogue response generation. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , 2122–2132. ACL.
Liu, Y .; Ott, M.; Goyal, N.; Du, J.; Joshi, M.; Chen, D.; Levy,
O.; Lewis, M.; and Stoyanov, L. Z. V . 2019. RoBERTa:
A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
Lowe, R.; Pow, N.; Serban, I.; and Pineau, J. 2015. The
Ubuntu dialogue corpus: A large dataset for research in
unstructured multi-turn dialogue systems. In Proceedings
of the 16th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group
on Discourse and Dialogue , 285–294. ACL.
Lowe, R.; Noseworthy, M.; Serban, I. V .; Angelard-Gontier,
N.; Bengio, Y .; and Pineau, J. 2017. Towards an automatic
turing test: Learning to evaluate dialogue responses. In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 1116–1126. ACL.
Mazar ´e, P.-E.; Humeau, S.; Raison, M.; and Bordes, A. 2018.
Training millions of personalized dialogue agents. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , 2775–2779. Brussels,
Belgium: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Miller, A.; Feng, W.; Batra, D.; Bordes, A.; Fisch, A.; Lu, J.;
Parikh, D.; and Weston, J. 2017. ParlAI: A dialog research
software platform. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations , 79–84. ACL.
Miller, K.; Wolf, M. J.; and Grodzinsky, F. 2017. Why we
should have seen that coming. ORBIT Journal 1(2).
Mitchell, T.; Cohen, W.; Hruschka, E.; Talukdar, P.; Yang, B.;
Betteridge, J.; Carlson, A.; Dalvi, B.; Gardner, M.; Kisiel,
B.; et al. 2018. Never-ending learning. Communications
of the ACM 61(5):103–115.
Moon, S.; Shah, P.; Kumar, A.; and Subba, R. 2019a. Opendi-
alkg: Explainable conversational reasoning with attention-
based walks over knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 845–854.
Moon, S.; Shah, P.; Subba, R.; and Kumar, A. 2019b. Mem-
ory grounded conversational reasoning. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP): System Demonstrations , 145–150.
Mostafazadeh, N.; Brockett, C.; Dolan, B.; Galley, M.; Gao,
J.; Spithourakis, G.; and Vanderwende, L. 2017. Image-
grounded conversations: Multimodal context for natural
question and response generation. In Proceedings of the
Eighth International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 462–472.
Taipei, Taiwan: Asian Federation of Natural Language
Processing.
Neff, G., and Nagy, P. 2016. Automation, algorithms, and
politics— talking to bots: Symbiotic agency and the case
of tay. International Journal of Communication 10.
Nguyen, T.; Rosenberg, M.; Song, X.; Gao, J.; Tiwary, S.;
Majumder, R.; and Deng, L. 2016. MS MARCO: A
human generated machine reading comprehension dataset.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
Nie, Y .; Williams, A.; Dinan, E.; Bansal, M.; Weston, J.; and
Kiela, D. 2020. Adversarial NLI: A new benchmark for
natural language understanding. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics .
Novikova, J.; Du ˇsek, O.; Curry, A. C.; and Rieser, V . 2017.
Why we need new evaluation metrics for NLG. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing , 2241–2252. ACL.
Novikova, J.; Du ˇsek, O.; and Rieser, V . 2018. RankME:
Reliable human ratings for natural language generation. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) ,
72–78. New Orleans, Louisiana: Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Papangelis, A.; Wang, Y .-C.; Molino, P.; and Tur, G. 2019.
Collaborative multi-agent dialogue model training via rein-
forcement learning. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual SIG-
dial Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue , 92–102. Stock-
holm, Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Papineni, K.; Roukos, S.; Ward, T.; and Zhu, W.-J. 2002.
Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting ofthe Association for Computational Linguistics , 311–318.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Parthasarathi, P., and Pineau, J. 2018. Extending neural
generative conversational model using external knowledge
sources. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 690–695.
ACL.
Peng, N.; Ghazvininejad, M.; May, J.; and Knight, K. 2018.
Towards controllable story generation. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Storytelling , 43–49. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Petroni, F.; Rockt ¨aschel, T.; Riedel, S.; Lewis, P.; Bakhtin,
A.; Wu, Y .; and Miller, A. 2019. Language models as
knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , 2463–2473. Hong
Kong, China: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Poliak, A.; Naradowsky, J.; Haldar, A.; Rudinger, R.; and
Van Durme, B. 2018. Hypothesis only baselines in natural
language inference. In Proceedings of the Seventh Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics .
Prabhumoye, S.; Li, M.; Urbanek, J.; Dinan, E.; Kiela, D.;
Weston, J.; and Szlam, A. 2020. I love your chain mail!
making knights smile in a fantasy game world. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.02878 .
Prabhumoye, S.; Quirk, C.; and Galley, M. 2019. Towards
content transfer through grounded text generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers) , 2622–2632. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Qin, L.; Bosselut, A.; Holtzman, A.; Bhagavatula, C.; Clark,
E.; and Choi, Y . 2019a. Counterfactual story reasoning
and generation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , 5043–5053. Hong
Kong, China: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Qin, L.; Galley, M.; Brockett, C.; Liu, X.; Gao, X.; Dolan,
B.; Choi, Y .; and Gao, J. 2019b. Conversing by reading:
Contentful neural conversation with on-demand machine
reading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02738 .
Radford, A.; Wu, J.; Child, R.; Luan, D.; Amodei, D.; and
Sutskever, I. 2019. Language models are unsupervised
multitask learners. OpenAI Blog 1(8).
Rajpurkar, P.; Zhang, J.; Lopyrev, K.; and Liang, P. 2016.
SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension
of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2383–2392.
ACL.
Rashkin, H.; Smith, E. M.; Li, M.; and Boureau, Y .-L. 2019.
Towards empathetic open-domain conversation models:
A new benchmark and dataset. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 5370–5381. Florence, Italy: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Reddy, S.; Chen, D.; and Manning, C. D. 2019. CoQA: A
conversational question answering challenge. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 7:249–
266.
Reeves, B., and Nass, C. I. 1996. The media equation: How
people treat computers, television, and new media like real
people and places. Cambridge university press.
Roller, S.; Dinan, E.; Goyal, N.; Ju, D.; Williamson, M.;
Liu, Y .; Xu, J.; Ott, M.; Shuster, K.; Smith, E. M.; et al.
2020. Recipes for building an open-domain chatbot. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.13637 .
Sanh, V .; Debut, L.; Chaumond, J.; and Wolf, T. 2019. Distil-
BERT, a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper
and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108 .
Savva, M.; Kadian, A.; Maksymets, O.; Zhao, Y .; Wijmans,
E.; Jain, B.; Straub, J.; Liu, J.; Koltun, V .; Malik, J.; et al.
2019. Habitat: A platform for embodied ai research. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.01201 .
See, A.; Roller, S.; Kiela, D.; and Weston, J. 2019. What
makes a good conversation? how controllable attributes
affect human judgments. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 1702–1723. ACL.
Sennrich, R.; Haddow, B.; and Birch, A. 2016. Neural
machine translation of rare words with subword units. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 1715–1725. ACL.
Serban, I. V .; Sordoni, A.; Bengio, Y .; Courville, A. C.; and
Pineau, J. 2016. Building end-to-end dialogue systems
using generative hierarchical neural network models. In
AAAI , volume 16, 3776–3784.
Serban, I. V .; Sankar, C.; Germain, M.; Zhang, S.; Lin, Z.;
Subramanian, S.; Kim, T.; Pieper, M.; Chandar, S.; Ke,
N. R.; et al. 2017. A deep reinforcement learning chatbot.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.02349 .
Serban, I. V .; Lowe, R.; Henderson, P.; Charlin, L.; and
Pineau, J. 2018. A survey of available corpora for building
data-driven dialogue systems: The journal version. Dia-
logue & Discourse 9(1):1–49.
Shah, P.; Hakkani-T ¨ur, D.; Liu, B.; and T ¨ur, G. 2018a. Boot-
strapping a neural conversational agent with dialogue self-
play, crowdsourcing and on-line reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 3 (Industry Pa-
pers) , 41–51. New Orleans - Louisiana: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Shah, P.; Hakkani-T ¨ur, D.; T ¨ur, G.; Rastogi, A.; Bapna, A.;
Nayak, N.; and Heck, L. 2018b. Building a conversational
agent overnight with dialogue self-play. arXiv preprint
arxiv:1801.04871 .Shiv, V . L.; Quirk, C.; Suri, A.; Gao, X.; Shahid, K.; Govin-
darajan, N.; Zhang, Y .; Gao, J.; Galley, M.; Brockett, C.;
Menon, T.; and Dolan, B. 2019. Microsoft icecaps: An
open-source toolkit for conversation modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations ,
123–128. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Shum, H.-y.; He, X.-d.; and Li, D. 2018. From Eliza to
XiaoIce: challenges and opportunities with social chat-
bots. Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic
Engineering 19(1):10–26.
Shuster, K.; Humeau, S.; Bordes, A.; and Weston, J. 2018.
Engaging image chat: Modeling personality in grounded
dialogue. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00945 .
Shuster, K.; Humeau, S.; Hu, H.; Bordes, A.; and Weston,
J. 2019. Engaging image captioning via personality. In
The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) .
Shuster, K.; Ju, D.; Roller, S.; Dinan, E.; Boureau, Y .-L.; and
Weston, J. 2020. The dialogue dodecathlon: Open-domain
knowledge and image grounded conversational agents. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics .
Singh, S. P.; Kearns, M. J.; Litman, D. J.; and Walker, M. A.
2000. Reinforcement learning for spoken dialogue systems.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
956–962.
Smith, E. M.; Gonzalez-Rico, D.; Dinan, E.; and Boureau, Y .-
L. 2019. Zero-shot ﬁne-grained style transfer: Leveraging
distributed continuous style representations to transfer to
unseen styles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03914 .
Smith, E.; Williamson, M.; Shuster, K.; Weston, J.; and
Boureau, Y .-L. 2020. Can you put it all together: Eval-
uating conversational agents’ ability to blend skills. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics .
Stewart, N.; Brown, G. D.; and Chater, N. 2005. Absolute
identiﬁcation by relative judgment. Psychological review
112(4):881.
Sukhbaatar, S.; Weston, J.; Fergus, R.; et al. 2015. End-to-
end memory networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2440–2448.
Sukhbaatar, S.; Grave, E.; Bojanowski, P.; and Joulin, A.
2019. Adaptive attention span in transformers. In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 331–335. Florence, Italy:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sutskever, I.; Vinyals, O.; and Le, Q. V . 2014. Sequence to
sequence learning with neural networks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 3104–3112.
Szlam, A.; Gray, J.; Srinet, K.; Jernite, Y .; Joulin, A.; Syn-
naeve, G.; Kiela, D.; Yu, H.; Chen, Z.; Goyal, S.; et al.
2019. Why build an assistant in minecraft? arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.09273 .
Turing, A. M. 1950. Computing machinery and intelligence .
Springer.
Urbanek, J.; Fan, A.; Karamcheti, S.; Jain, S.; Humeau, S.;
Dinan, E.; Rockt ¨aschel, T.; Kiela, D.; Szlam, A.; and We-
ston, J. 2019. Learning to speak and act in a fantasy text
adventure game. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , 673–683. Hong
Kong, China: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones,
L.; Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser, Ł.; and Polosukhin, I. 2017. At-
tention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 5998–6008.
Vedantam, R.; Zitnick, C. L.; and Parikh, D. 2015. Cider:
Consensus-based image description evaluation. In CVPR ,
4566–4575. IEEE Computer Society.
Venkatesh, A.; Khatri, C.; Ram, A.; Guo, F.; Gabriel, R.;
Nagar, A.; Prasad, R.; Cheng, M.; Hedayatnia, B.; Met-
allinou, A.; et al. 2017. On evaluating and comparing
conversational agents. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, Conversational AI Workshop .
Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. 2015. A neural conversational model.
InProceedings of the 31st International Conference on
Machine Learning, Deep Learning Workshop .
Wei, W.; Le, Q. V .; Dai, A. M.; and Li, L.-J. 2018. A goal-
oriented neural conversation model by self-play.
Welleck, S.; Weston, J.; Szlam, A.; and Cho, K. 2019. Di-
alogue natural language inference. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 3731–3741. Florence, Italy: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Welleck, S.; Kulikov, I.; Roller, S.; Dinan, E.; Cho, K.; and
Weston, J. 2020. Neural text generation with unlikeli-
hood training. In International Conference on Learning
Representations .
Wen, T.-H.; Vandyke, D.; Mrk ˇsi´c, N.; Gasic, M.; Rojas Bara-
hona, L. M.; Su, P.-H.; Ultes, S.; and Young, S. 2017. A
network-based end-to-end trainable task-oriented dialogue
system. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics . ACL. 438–449.
Wentzel, K. R. 1997. Student motivation in middle school:
The role of perceived pedagogical caring. Journal of edu-
cational psychology 89(3):411.
Weston, J.; Bordes, A.; Chopra, S.; Rush, A. M.; van
Merri ¨enboer, B.; Joulin, A.; and Mikolov, T. 2015. To-
wards ai-complete question answering: A set of prerequi-
site toy tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.05698 .
Weston, J.; Chopra, S.; and Bordes, A. 2014. Memory
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.3916 .
Weston, J.; Dinan, E.; and Miller, A. 2018. Retrieve and
reﬁne: Improved sequence generation models for dialogue.
InProceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop SCAI: The2nd International Workshop on Search-Oriented Conver-
sational AI , 87–92. Brussels, Belgium: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Weston, J. E. 2016. Dialog-based language learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 829–
837.
Williams, A.; Nangia, N.; and Bowman, S. 2018. A broad-
coverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding
through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , 1112–1122. New Orleans,
Louisiana: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Wolf, T.; Debut, L.; Sanh, V .; Chaumond, J.; Delangue, C.;
Moi, A.; Cistac, P.; Rault, T.; Louf, R.; Funtowicz, M.; and
Brew, J. 2019a. HuggingFace’s transformers: State-of-the-
art natural language processing. ArXiv abs/1910.03771.
Wolf, T.; Sanh, V .; Chaumond, J.; and Delangue, C. 2019b.
TransferTransfo: A transfer learning approach for neural
network based conversational agents. In NeurIPS Work-
shop on Conversational AI .
Yang, Z.; Zhang, S.; Urbanek, J.; Feng, W.; Miller, A. H.;
Szlam, A.; Kiela, D.; and Weston, J. 2017. Mastering
the dungeon: Grounded language learning by mechanical
turker descent. In Proceedings of International Conference
on Learning Representations .
Yang, Z.; Dai, Z.; Yang, Y .; Carbonell, J.; Salakhutdinov, R.;
and Le, Q. V . 2019. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive
pretraining for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.08237 .
Yoshino, K.; Hori, C.; Perez, J.; D’Haro, L. F.; Polymenakos,
L.; Gunasekara, C.; Lasecki, W. S.; Kummerfeld, J.; Galley,
M.; Brockett, C.; Gao, J.; Dolan, B.; Gao, S.; Marks, T. K.;
Parikh, D.; and Batra, D. 2018. The 7th dialog system
technology challenge. arXiv preprint .
Young, S.; Ga ˇsi´c, M.; Thomson, B.; and Williams, J. D. 2013.
Pomdp-based statistical spoken dialog systems: A review.
Proceedings of the IEEE 101(5):1160–1179.
Yu, H.; Wang, J.; Huang, Z.; Yang, Y .; and Xu, W. 2016.
Video paragraph captioning using hierarchical recurrent
neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , 4584–4593.
Zellers, R.; Holtzman, A.; Bisk, Y .; Farhadi, A.; and Choi,
Y . 2019. HellaSwag: Can a machine really ﬁnish your
sentence? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics , 4791–4800.
Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhang, S.; Dinan, E.; Urbanek, J.; Szlam, A.; Kiela, D.; and
Weston, J. 2018. Personalizing dialogue agents: I have
a dog, do you have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , 2204–2213. ACL.
Zhang, Y .; Sun, S.; Galley, M.; Chen, Y .-C.; Brockett, C.; Gao,
X.; Gao, J.; Liu, J.; and Dolan, B. 2019. DialoGPT: Large-
scale generative pre-training for conversational response
generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00536 .
Zhou, L.; Gao, J.; Li, D.; and Shum, H.-Y . 2020. The de-
sign and implementation of XiaoIce, an empathetic social
chatbot. Computational Linguistics 1–62.