Title: Societal Biases in Language Generation: Progress and Challenges

Societal Biases in Language Generation: Progress and Challenges
Emily Sheng1, Kai-Wei Chang2, Premkumar Natarajan1, Nanyun Peng1;2
1Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
2Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
fewsheng,pnataraj g@isi.edu ,fkwchang,violetpeng g@cs.ucla.edu
Abstract
Technology for language generation has ad-
vanced rapidly, spurred by advancements in
pre-training large models on massive amounts
of data and the need for intelligent agents to
communicate in a natural manner. While tech-
niques can effectively generate ﬂuent text, they
can also produce undesirable societal biases
that can have a disproportionately negative im-
pact on marginalized populations. Language
generation presents unique challenges for bi-
ases in terms of direct user interaction and
the structure of decoding techniques. To bet-
ter understand these challenges, we present a
survey on societal biases in language gener-
ation, focusing on how data and techniques
contribute to biases and progress towards re-
ducing biases. Motivated by a lack of studies
on biases from decoding techniques, we also
conduct experiments to quantify the effects
of these techniques. By further discussing
general trends and open challenges, we call
to attention promising directions for research
and the importance of fairness and inclusivity
considerations for language generation appli-
cations.
1 Introduction
Natural language generation (NLG) is a suite of
techniques that enables the generation of human-
readable language for different goals. These tech-
niques are the core components of applications
such as virtual assistants, chat bots, automatic trans-
lators, summarizers, and creative language com-
posers. Recent advances in techniques for language
generation (e.g., GPT (Radford et al., 2018), GPT-2
(Radford et al., 2019), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020),
TransformerXL (Dai et al., 2019), XLNet (Yang
et al., 2019)) powered by Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017) and an increasing repository of avail-
able data have created more capable applications.
This has, in turn, channeled more interest and effortinto developing NLG techniques.
We emphasize the importance of better under-
standing how societal biases manifest in NLG tech-
niques, because NLG applications directly inter-
actwith many different users to generate novel
content in various domains (e.g., chat bots for
health, education, and customer support). However,
when techniques are less effective or detrimental
for marginalized populations, these techniques can
inadvertently become gatekeepers of those popula-
tions for generation and associated language tech-
nologies. For example, an educational chat bot that
produces more negative responses for topics about
a speciﬁc ethnicity will discourage users of that eth-
nicity from interacting with the chat bot. While it
is generally important to study the societal impact
of NLP and AI techniques, we argue that the direct
user impact of NLG techniques makes it especially
important to carefully quantify the impact.
Motivated by the importance of fairness in lan-
guage generation, we present the ﬁrst comprehen-
sive survey on societal biases in language genera-
tion. By enumerating how NLG techniques con-
tribute to biases and examining progress towards
bias analysis and mitigation, we contextualize the
discussion of broader trends and challenges. Specif-
ically, we focus on techniques for NLG tasks, i.e.,
tasks that generate a sequence of text.1Finding a
lack of studies on biases from decoding techniques,
we additionally present an experimental study to
quantify the effects of various decoding techniques.
Before we delve into the details of biases in lan-
guage generation, we ﬁrst position our survey in
the context of other relevant surveys and position
papers. Sun et al. (2019) present a focused survey
1Although bi-directional language models like BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2019) can also be used for auto-regressive gener-
ation (Wang and Cho, 2019; Chen et al., 2020), traditional
auto-regressive models are still typically of better quality and
more widely used for generation (Shwartz et al., 2020). Thus,
we limit the scope of this survey to the latter models.arXiv:2105.04054v3  [cs.CL]  22 Jun 2021
Demo. Dim. NLG Task Works
Gender Autocomplete Bordia and Bowman (2019); Qian et al. (2019); Solaiman et al. (2019); Sheng et al. (2019,
2020); Vig et al. (2020); Yeo and Chen (2020); Brown et al. (2020); Dhamala et al. (2021);
Schick et al. (2021); Nozza et al. (2021); Kirk et al. (2021)
Dialogue Henderson et al. (2018); Dinan et al. (2020a); Liu et al. (2020a,b); Cercas Curry et al. (2020);
Sheng et al. (2021a,b)
MT Vanmassenhove et al. (2018); Elaraby et al. (2018); Prates et al. (2019); Stanovsky et al.
(2019); Escud ´e Font and Costa-juss `a (2019); Cho et al. (2019); Moryossef et al. (2019);
Saunders and Byrne (2020); Saunders et al. (2020); Kocmi et al. (2020); Costa-juss `a and
de Jorge (2020); Costa-juss `a et al. (2020); Basta et al. (2020); Farkas and N ´emeth (2020);
Stafanovi ˇcs et al. (2020); Gonen and Webster (2020); Hovy et al. (2020); Roberts et al.
(2020); Cho et al. (2021); Savoldi et al. (2021); Renduchintala and Williams (2021); Choubey
et al. (2021); Saunders et al. (2021); Tomalin et al. (2021)
Re-writing Habash et al. (2019); Zmigrod et al. (2019); Alhafni et al. (2020); Sun et al. (2021)
Profession Autocomplete Huang et al. (2020); Dhamala et al. (2021)
Race Autocomplete Solaiman et al. (2019); Sheng et al. (2019, 2020); Groenwold et al. (2020); Brown et al.
(2020); Dhamala et al. (2021); Schick et al. (2021); Kirk et al. (2021)
Dialogue Sheng et al. (2021a,b)
Religion Autocomplete Solaiman et al. (2019); Brown et al. (2020); Dhamala et al. (2021); Kirk et al. (2021); Abid
et al. (2021)
Sexuality Autocomplete Sheng et al. (2019, 2020); Kirk et al. (2021)
Dialogue Sheng et al. (2021a)
Other Autocomplete Shwartz et al. (2020); Peng et al. (2020); Huang et al. (2020); Dhamala et al. (2021); Kirk
et al. (2021)
Dialogue Sheng et al. (2021a)
Re-writing Pryzant et al. (2020); Ma et al. (2020)
Table 1: Existing bias studies on different demographic dimensions in various NLG tasks: autocomplete genera-
tion, dialogue generation, machine translation (MT), and text re-writing.
on mitigating gender biases and Shah et al. (2020)
categorize sources of biases—both largely focus
on natural language understanding (NLU) tasks,
while we examine biases in NLG tasks. Addition-
ally, Blodgett et al. (2020) urge for more explicitly
tying “biases” in NLP to societal normative deﬁ-
nitions of biases and social hierarchies; with their
recommendations in mind, we discuss the negative
impacts of biases in NLG techniques.
Our contributions are a comprehensive survey
on societal biases in language generation and an
experimental study on biases from decoding tech-
niques. To start, we describe classes of NLG tasks
(Sec. 2) and subsequently examine examples of bi-
ases and harms in NLG (Sec. 3). We then discuss
NLG techniques that facilitate biases, including a
study of decoding techniques (Sec. 4). Sec. 5 high-
lights progress and challenges, and Sec. 6 presents
open problems and proposals. We hope this survey
brings more visibility to the importance of carefully
considering different components of NLG pipelines
for potential biases and mitigation methods.
2 Language Generation Tasks
To begin, we categorize generation tasks and in-
troduce existing bias studies relevant to each task.
NLG tasks broadly fall into two categories: thosethat generate text continuations conditioned on
some prompt and those that transform text from
one form to another . Table 1 organizes various
bias-related works for NLG tasks.
2.1 Continuation Generation Tasks
The continuation class includes autocomplete and
dialogue generation, where the goal is to generate
text that is coherent and relevant to a prompt.
Autocomplete Generation We use the term au-
tocomplete generation to refer to conditional gen-
eration directly from language models. Language
models are the core components for many NLG
and NLU tasks, and this task enables directly quan-
tifying biases in large, pre-trained language models
(Bordia and Bowman, 2019; Sheng et al., 2019;
Solaiman et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). Exist-
ing works analyzing biases in autocomplete gen-
eration have mostly examined Transformer-based
models, including GPT (Shwartz et al., 2020), GPT-
2 (Solaiman et al., 2019; Sheng et al., 2019, 2020;
Shwartz et al., 2020; Vig et al., 2020; Yeo and Chen,
2020; Huang et al., 2020; Dhamala et al., 2021;
Schick et al., 2021), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020),
CTRL (Dhamala et al., 2021), TransformerXL
(Shwartz et al., 2020; Vig et al., 2020; Huang et al.,
2020), and XLNet (Shwartz et al., 2020; Vig et al.,
2020; Yeo and Chen, 2020), though Bordia and
Bowman (2019); Qian et al. (2019) also look at
LSTM-based models.
Dialogue Generation Dialogue generation is
conditioned on user inputs and can be for spe-
ciﬁc domains (e.g., health, customer service) and
tasks (e.g., behavior intervention, booking ﬂights)
or general chit-chat. These dialogue applications
directly interact with users, and any propagated
biases directly affect user behavior and actions.
In terms of recurrent dialogue models, Henderson
et al. (2018) analyze biases in hierarchical recur-
rent encoder-decoder architectures and Liu et al.
(2020a,b) analyze LSTM-based encoder-decoder
models. Other works on dialogue biases (Dinan
et al., 2020a; Sheng et al., 2020, 2021b) focus
on Transformer-based models such as DialoGPT
(Zhang et al., 2020) and other custom architectures.
2.2 Transformation Generation Tasks
The transformation class includes machine trans-
lation and various formulations of text re-writing.
The general goal of these tasks is to transform text
into a form with targeted properties.
Machine Translation Translation is the task of
transforming text between languages while pre-
serving the meaning. Existing works on biases
in machine translation have almost exclusively fo-
cused on issues of gender biases2in a variety of
academic and commercial systems. The use of
grammatical gender in some languages and not in
others can expose unwanted gender associations
(e.g., for different occupations) through translation
(Prates et al., 2019). Earlier works by Vanmassen-
hove et al. (2018) and Elaraby et al. (2018) study
LSTM-based encoder-decoder translation systems,
and more recent works examine Transformer-based
architectures (Escud ´e Font and Costa-juss `a, 2019;
Stanovsky et al., 2019; Saunders and Byrne, 2020;
Saunders et al., 2020; Costa-juss `a and de Jorge,
2020; Basta et al., 2020; Stafanovi ˇcs et al., 2020;
Renduchintala and Williams, 2021; Choubey et al.,
2021; Saunders et al., 2021; Tomalin et al., 2021).
While Google Translate3has been the most pop-
ular commercial system to analyze for gender bi-
ases (Prates et al., 2019; Moryossef et al., 2019;
Stanovsky et al., 2019; Cho et al., 2019; Farkas
and N ´emeth, 2020), Stanovsky et al. (2019) also
2For a detailed survey of gender bias in machine transla-
tion, we refer readers to Savoldi et al. (2021).
3https://translate.google.comstudy Microsoft Translator,4Amazon Translate,5
and SYSTRAN;6Cho et al. (2019) additionally
look at Naver Papago7and Kakao Translator,8and
Cho et al. (2021) also examine Yandex.9
Re-writing We use the term re-writing to refer
to tasks of revising speciﬁc words and phrases in
the original text to be more aligned with a targeted
attribute. Speciﬁcally, there have been studies on
re-inﬂection (Habash et al., 2019; Zmigrod et al.,
2019; Alhafni et al., 2020) and re-writing text to use
neutral viewpoints (Pryzant et al., 2020), gender-
neutral English (Sun et al., 2021), or more agency
(Ma et al., 2020). These tasks typically rely on
custom encoder-decoder models.
2.3 Other Tasks
There are other NLG tasks, such as the continua-
tion tasks of story and poetry generation, and the
transformation tasks of abstractive summarization
and paraphrase generation. However, these other
NLG tasks are not yet well-studied in the context
of societal biases.10
3 Biases and their Negative Impacts
In this section, we introduce how existing studies
of biases in NLG tasks commonly quantify biases
and their negative impacts.
3.1 Bias Deﬁnitions and Metrics
In the context of AI fairness, the term “bias” com-
monly refers to skews that result in undesirable
impacts (Crawford, 2017) and is quantiﬁable with
some metric. There are relatively more existing
studies on biases in NLU tasks, where it is arguably
simpler to deﬁne bias metrics, since we can intu-
itively compare the accuracy of the task (e.g., coref-
erence resolution, hate speech detection) for differ-
ent demographics. Language generation tasks often
involve stochastic generation of open-ended and
lengthy texts, traits that are not directly compatible
with traditional algorithmic bias deﬁnitions (e.g.,
4https://www.bing.com/translator
5https://aws.amazon.com/translate
6https://www.systransoft.com
7https://papago.naver.com
8https://translate.kakao.com
9https://translate.yandex.com
10Lucy and Bamman (2021) is an exception that analyzes
gender in generated stories. While there are studies of bi-
ases in poetry generation and summarization, they focus on
non-NLG biases: Sheng and Uthus (2020) investigate biases
in a poetry composition system, but in the context of infor-
mation retrieval; Celis and Keswani (2020) analyze biases in
extractive summarization.
equalized odds, equal opportunity, demographic
parity (Dwork et al., 2012; Hardt et al., 2016)).
Because of the difﬁculty in deﬁning metrics, ex-
isting works deﬁne bias loosely as demographic
inequality and use intermediate proxy metrics to
comparatively measure bias. Examples include:
•Regard Ratio :negative-neutral-positive regard
score ratios of text generated from bias-inducing
prompts (Sheng et al., 2019)
•Sentiment Ratio :negative-neutral-positive sen-
timent score ratios of text generated from African
American English (AAE) versus White-Aligned
English (WAE) prompts (Groenwold et al., 2020)
•Individual and Group Fairness through Sen-
timent : comparisons of the sentiment distribu-
tions of generated text across demographics and
prompts (Huang et al., 2020)
•Gendered Word Co-occurrence Score : mean
and standard deviations of the absolute log ra-
tio of probabilities: P(wordjfemale terms )to
P(wordjmale terms )across all words in gener-
ated text (Bordia and Bowman, 2019)
There are also metrics for other bias evaluation
setups in continuation generation tasks involving
sentiment (Shwartz et al., 2020), the ratio of gen-
dered words (Solaiman et al., 2019; Vig et al., 2020;
Dinan et al., 2020a), and other novel metrics (Peng
et al., 2020; Yeo and Chen, 2020). Studies of biases
in transformation generation tasks favor metrics of
accuracy in terms of successfully transforming text
to have a desired property. We present a more thor-
ough comparison of metrics in Section 5.4.
Bias metrics can also be categorized by how they
deﬁne associations between demographic group at-
tributes and text. Biases can be towards people
described in text, people who produce the text,
or people to whom the text is addressed (Dinan
et al., 2020b). Most existing works deﬁne bias
metrics through the ﬁrst association—these biases
are relatively easier to analyze, since both the de-
mographic and the textual signals of bias are en-
capsulated within the text. There are also works
that deﬁne biases towards people who produce the
text (Groenwold et al., 2020) or people to whom
the text is addressed (Sheng et al., 2021b), though
there are relatively fewer works that study these
latter associations.
3.2 Negative Impacts
Biases in NLG techniques are important to study
because they can result in harmful, negative im-pacts. We survey detrimental representational11
and allocational12impacts (Crawford, 2017; Baro-
cas et al., 2017; Blodgett et al., 2020) used to moti-
vate existing studies of bias in NLG tasks, ﬁnding
limited examples. While representational impacts
are sometimes cited, it is difﬁcult to measure the
extent of the impacts. Additionally, techniques
for effective NLG are relatively new, and existing
studies have limited knowledge of potential alloca-
tional impacts. Finally, biases in NLG tasks give
rise to a third type of negative impacts, which we
callvulnerability impacts .
Representational Impacts The works in Ta-
ble 1 motivate (to varying degrees) studying bi-
ases in NLG through potential negative representa-
tional impacts, in the form of propagating stereo-
types, misrepresentations, or denigrations of social
groups. For example, Sheng et al. (2019) enumer-
ate how generated text can propagate varying social
perceptions of different demographics, and Prates
et al. (2019) discuss how occupation-related gender
biases could propagate stereotypes in translation.
However, it is difﬁcult to quantify the effects of rep-
resentational impacts;13while such impacts may be
measured indirectly (e.g. by analyzing allocational
impacts), we suggest long-term, interdisciplinary
collaborations to explore the direct effects of these
representational impacts.
Allocational Impacts Harmful allocational im-
pacts result from an unequal allocation of resources
across groups. Since effective NLG techniques
based on large Transformer models (Vaswani et al.,
2017) are relatively new, most of the existing works
on biases in NLG that list possible impacts only
analyze direct representational consequences. A
real example of a negative allocational impact is
when machine translation errors lead to arrests
(Ong, 2017). In general, technologies that are less
effective or detrimental for certain populations be-
come barriers that actively prevent those popula-
tions from using the technology, leading to dimin-
ished opportunities in jobs, education, health, etc.
We discuss more details in Section 4.5. With contin-
uous technological advances, more organizations
will turn to effective NLG techniques, making it
imperative to start setting norms to reduce harmful
allocational impacts (Tamkin et al., 2021).
11Unfair representations of different groups
12Unfair allocation of resources
13Kay et al. (2015) is a rare example that explicitly studies
the effect of representational impacts in image search.
Vulnerability Impacts Open-domain generation
tasks can amplify a group’s vulnerability to manip-
ulation and harm , which is an intermediate impact
that makes a group more susceptible to represen-
tational and allocational impacts. For example,
privacy-related issues (Carlini et al., 2020), misin-
formation (Levy et al., 2021), or radicalizing views
in generated text could make a group more likely to
be attributed to speciﬁc stereotypes (e.g., through
action guided by misinformation) or end up with
diminished opportunities (e.g., by having personal
data exposed and misused). Separately identifying
vulnerability impacts could help facilitate recogni-
tion of other negative impacts.
4 Contributors to NLG Biases
In a pipeline from data collection to evaluation
for an NLG task, each component could propagate
biases.14We emphasize the ways in which data,
model architecture, decoding, evaluation, and de-
ployment uniquely exacerbate biases in generation
tasks. Additionally, we present an empirical study
to show how measured biases in generated text can
vary based on decoding technique.
4.1 Biases from Data
Modern NLP models often rely on large pre-trained
language models, which in turn rely on a large col-
lection of data to learn explicit and implicit associ-
ations. Several recent pre-trained language models
used for NLG tasks, e.g., T5 (Raffel et al., 2020)
and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), are trained on the
largest datasets used for any models. These large
models for generation are commonly trained on
web data, which is known to contain biased lan-
guage (e.g., Ferrer et al. (2021) discover gender,
religion, and ethnic biases in Reddit communities).
While preprocessing is often included to ﬁlter out
malformatted data and explicitly negative content
(e.g., bad words and offensive phrases), those are
generally the only efforts to reduce biases and as-
sociated impacts. Furthermore, by ﬁltering out all
words deemed “bad”, Bender et al. (2021) warns
that we remove the discourse of marginalized pop-
ulations. Paullada et al. (2020), Bender and Fried-
man (2018), and Gebru et al. (2018) provide more
comprehensive surveys and frameworks that focus
on aspects of data creation and management that
14Task formulation and application deployment are also
part of NLG task pipelines (Kiritchenko et al., 2020), though
we do not focus on biases in these areas.could lead to biases, and we refer readers to their
works for more discussion. In the context of trans-
lation, Cho et al. (2021) ﬁnd that more data can
increase translation ﬂuency but may also make the
system more biased.
4.2 Biases from Model Architecture
There are relatively few studies that examine model
architectural properties that could lead to biases.
We discuss the few efforts towards understanding
model biases in NLG tasks and emphasize the need
for more to generalize. For autocomplete gener-
ation, Vig et al. (2020) analyze GPT-2 variants
through a causal mediation analysis, ﬁnding that
larger models contain more gender bias, and bias
tends to be concentrated in a small number of neu-
rons and attention heads. Silva et al. (2021) ob-
serve ampliﬁed biases in distilled versus original
models. For machine translation, Costa-juss `a et al.
(2020) note that language-speciﬁc architectures are
less biased because they encode more gender in-
formation than shared language encoder-decoder
architectures. Studies like the aforementioned are
useful for designing targeted bias mitigation meth-
ods (e.g., controlled generation to target speciﬁc
attention heads or regularization to retain gender
information). However, more evidence would be
needed to generalize ﬁndings across models.15
4.3 Biases from Decoding
While NLU and NLG models have structural simi-
larities, NLG tasks uniquely use search or sampling
techniques at inference time to generate text. Popu-
lar techniques include:
•Greedy Search : at each time step, choose the
word with the highest probability.
•Beam Search : at each time step, keep the top b
hypotheses with highest probabilities; eventually
pick the hypothesis with the highest probability.
•Top-ksampling (Fan et al., 2018): at each time
step, re-distribute the probability mass of the top
kwords with highest probabilities and sample.
•Nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2019): at
each time step, re-distribute the probability mass
of the smallest set of words with a cumulative
probability exceeding pand sample.
More constrained forms of generation such as ma-
chine translation generally use variations of beam
15We also refer the reader to the work of Park et al. (2018)
that discusses biases in NLU tasks from model components
that “attend” to speciﬁc words (e.g., through attention or pool-
ing), which could be applicable to NLG tasks as well.
search; however, preferred decoding techniques are
more varied for open-domain generation. Despite
variations in ﬂuency and diversity between deter-
ministic versus stochastic, search versus sampling
procedures, there are limited studies (Roberts et al.,
2020) on how different decoding properties affect
biases in generation.
A Study on Biases from Decoding To study
how decoding techniques affect biases in gener-
ation, we use existing NLG bias metrics to evalu-
ate text generated from different decoding meth-
ods.16We examine autocomplete generations from
GPT, GPT-2, and XLNet, using the decoding tech-
niques from Section 4.3. We evaluate with the
following bias metrics: regard ratios (Sheng et al.,
2019), sentiment ratios (Groenwold et al., 2020),
individual and group fairness through sentiment
scores (Huang et al., 2020), and gendered word
co-occurrence scores (Bordia and Bowman, 2019)
(as introduced in Section 3). More experimental
details can be found in the Appendix.
In Section 5.4, we distinguish between relative
and absolute score metrics to examine evaluation
differences between NLG tasks. Here, we orga-
nize our results into these categories to generalize
trends about decoding techniques. The ratio-based
metrics are relative score metrics, since evaluation
relies on comparing ratios between demographics.
The latter three metrics are absolute score metrics
that have target values of zero indicating no bias.
For the relative score metrics, search and sam-
pling techniques generate similar outcomes. An
interesting result between sampling techniques for
the regard metric is that nucleus sampling is less
biased yet more negative than top- ksampling. For
the absolute score metrics, we ﬁnd that beam search
is the most unbiased technique, closely followed
by greedy search and then top- kand nucleus sam-
pling. Through our study, we discover that text
diversity is not accounted for in any of the bias
metrics, yet diversity can be a confounding fac-
tor. Speciﬁcally, beam search is the least diverse,17
followed by greedy search, top- ksampling, then
nucleus sampling. Results indicate that the less
diverse search techniques lead to better scores for
individual fairness, group fairness, and gendered
word co-occurrence ratios.
We hope these experimental results will encour-
16Code at https://github.com/ewsheng/
decoding-biases .
17We report average generated text length and vocabulary
sizes to estimate diversity in Appendix Table 4.age researchers to document sampling techniques,
consider how metrics can be formulated to evaluate
both bias and other factors of generation quality,
and inspire more comprehensive studies.18
4.4 Biases from Evaluation
Biases can arise from both general evaluations and
bias evaluations for NLG tasks.
General Evaluations Current standards for
NLG evaluation can reinforce certain types of lan-
guage and penalize others. For example, using
perplexity as measured by models pre-trained on
datasets largely containing non-AAE text leads
to an unfair evaluation of AAE text. Addition-
ally, the subjectivity of generation tasks means that
much of NLG evaluation depends on human labels.
Since humans from different backgrounds are ac-
customed to different societal norms and linguistic
variations, the choice of human annotators could
drastically inﬂuence the evaluation standards for
generated text.
Bias Evaluations It is difﬁcult to evaluate so-
cietal biases in NLG tasks because NLG can be
open-domain, and there are many different notions
of biases from various backgrounds and cultures
(Sambasivan et al., 2021). These factors lead to
the use of a variety of metrics to evaluate biases
(Section 3). To avoid experimental bias in eval-
uation, we recommend using multiple metrics to
cover many types of biases at various granulari-
ties. We identify three points to emphasize the
need for more comprehensive evaluations. First,
most existing works on biases in generation center
around one demographic dimension (often gender
and from a Western perspective, e.g., using stan-
dard Western occupations). While there has been
no comprehensive study on whether mitigating bi-
ases for one demographic dimension (e.g., gender)
may exacerbate biases for others (e.g., race, inter-
sectional identities), this is a possibility we must
consider. Second, most works only evaluate bias
through a single intermediate proxy; however, dif-
ferent metrics are deﬁned at different granularities
(e.g., sentiment is sentence-level, gendered word
ratio is word-level). Finally, different evaluation
datasets test for speciﬁc types of biases and are
inﬂuenced by the backgrounds of the curators. Col-
lectively evaluating biases across demographic di-
mensions and granularities can thus help reduce
experimentally-biased evaluations.
18Results are summarized in Appendix Tables 2, 3, and 5.
4.5 Biases from Deploying Systems
In terms of deploying NLG systems, there is a
feedback loop that beneﬁts some communities and
further disadvantages others. While this feedback
loop is not unique to NLG systems, these systems
that directly interact with users make good caution-
ary examples.
First, many deployed language technologies re-
quire internet access both to use and contribute
feedback, thus favoring the views and languages of
those privileged with this access. For example, any-
one can contribute feedback to Google Translate,
but if contributions and subsequent improvements
are focused on high-resource languages, this fur-
ther increases the accuracy gap between the high
and low resource languages, diminishing opportuni-
ties for speakers of the low resource languages, i.e.,
representation disparity (Hashimoto et al., 2018).
Second, those who are unable to achieve their
goals from using these language technologies (e.g.,
unsuccessful translation, unhelpful or offensive
chat bot) are less likely to continue using the tech-
nology. This means that there is less feedback and
data to improve the technologies, reinforcing the
decreased effectiveness for certain populations, i.e.,
disparity ampliﬁcation (Hashimoto et al., 2018).
One way we might intervene is to follow a more
targeted approach for data and feedback collection,
e.g., from excluded populations. However, we ac-
knowledge that this remains a difﬁcult task and
that it is also necessary to be aware of “commu-
nity goals” and other factors in order to co-design
language technologies without inﬂicting additional
harm on marginalized populations (Bird, 2020).
5 Progress, Trends, and Challenges
Following the discussion of contributors to biases,
we survey trends and challenges for reducing biases
in NLG.
5.1 Data Methods
Data-based methods for both bias analysis and mit-
igation use the general idea of counterfactual data
augmentation (CDA) (Lu et al., 2020) to curate sets
of counterfactual prompts. A common method for
analysis is using targeted prompts to induce NLG
models to reveal biases. For data-based mitigation,
existing works focus on ﬁne-tuning large models
or training smaller models with datasets that are
balanced with respect to targeted demographics.Curated Datasets Existing datasets to study bi-
ases in translation include parallel sentences tagged
with speaker or subject gender information (Van-
massenhove et al., 2018; Habash et al., 2019) and
datasets to study gender biases when translating
from neutral references of a person (e.g., nurse in
English, gender-neutral pronouns) to gendered in-
stances (e.g., enfermera orenfermero in Spanish,
gendered pronouns) (Cho et al., 2019; Stanovsky
et al., 2019; Gonen and Webster, 2020; Kocmi et al.,
2020). Renduchintala and Williams (2021) addi-
tionally provide a dataset to study translation of
neutral references in unambiguous contexts. Other
works present parallel corpora of biased versus un-
biased framings and presuppositions (Pryzant et al.,
2020) and AAE versus WAE equivalents (Groen-
wold et al., 2020). Sheng et al. (2019); Huang et al.
(2020); Dhamala et al. (2021) additionally curate
sets of prompts that can be used to evaluate biases
in autocomplete generation.
Bias Analysis Most bias analyses of NLG tasks
use prompts to probe for different biases in gener-
ated text, e.g., regarding social perception (Sheng
et al., 2019), gender in translation (Prates et al.,
2019), names (Shwartz et al., 2020), sentiment
distribution (Huang et al., 2020), dialects (Groen-
wold et al., 2020), dialogue personas (Sheng et al.,
2021a), or other notions of similarity across demo-
graphics (Yeo and Chen, 2020; Henderson et al.,
2018). Vig et al. (2020) also use prompts to investi-
gate gender biases, though they do so in the context
of a causal mediation analysis. Furthermore, Prates
et al. (2019) and Farkas and N ´emeth (2020) com-
pare pronoun gender biases in translations (induced
with prompts) to real-world statistics.
Bias Mitigation Methods can broadly be classi-
ﬁed into two categories based on the type of data ap-
plied. The ﬁrst category encompasses methods that
ﬁne-tune or train on a balanced dataset to lessen
the effects of the model relying on spurious corre-
lations between imbalanced data and task perfor-
mance. CDA has been applied to datasets used for
continued or fresh training in dialogue generation
(Dinan et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2020a) as well as
machine translation (Saunders and Byrne, 2020;
Costa-juss `a and de Jorge, 2020; Stafanovi ˇcs et al.,
2020). The second category is methods that at-
tach a short preﬁx at training time (Vanmassenhove
et al., 2018; Basta et al., 2020; Alhafni et al., 2020)
or inference time (Moryossef et al., 2019).
Challenges The size of state-of-the-art pre-
trained models and varying deﬁnitions of biases
in generation present difﬁculties for creating stan-
dardized datasets that are generally effective across
biases and demographics. Moreover, it remains to
be seen whether data-based mitigation is as effec-
tive for open-domain NLG tasks as it is for more
constrained settings.
5.2 Training Methods
In addition to data-based mitigation, training-based
mitigation is another popular class of methods to
reduce biases in generation.
Bias Mitigation Several works that use training-
based mitigation techniques rely on regularization
(Bordia and Bowman, 2019; Qian et al., 2019;
Huang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020a; Saunders and
Byrne, 2020). There are also works that induce con-
trol by incorporating a bias control code through
conditional training (Dinan et al., 2020a), by ap-
pending a target value to inputs during training
(Ma et al., 2020), by using a normative classiﬁer to
produce reward values for backpropagation (Peng
et al., 2020), or through adversarial training (Liu
et al., 2020b). Other techniques include using de-
biased word embeddings (Escud ´e Font and Costa-
juss`a, 2019), identifying and editing out subjective
words (Pryzant et al., 2020), and using Markov ran-
dom ﬁelds to preserve morpho-syntactic agreement
during reinﬂection (Zmigrod et al., 2019).
Challenges The main challenge of bias mitiga-
tion through training methods is that it is costly and
impractical to re-train models for new biases en-
countered. In fact, most of the techniques that rely
on training from scratch use smaller architectures
(exceptions are from larger institutions).
5.3 Inference Methods
While the existing literature on inference time meth-
ods for bias mitigation is sparse, decoding-based
methods are a promising alternative to data- and
training-based methods. Speciﬁcally, these meth-
ods are compatible with any pre-trained language
model for generation without additional training.
Given recent development of inference-time meth-
ods for control that can reduce toxicity (e.g., PPLM
(Dathathri et al., 2019), GeDi (Krause et al., 2020),
DExperts (Liu et al., 2021)), there is potential for
extending these methods to bias mitigation.
Bias Mitigation For autocomplete and dialogue
generation, Sheng et al. (2020) formulate bias trig-
gers using gradient-based methods of Wallace et al.
(2019). These triggers are appended to prompts
during inference time to control text generation tobe more equalized towards different demographics.
For translation, Saunders and Byrne (2020) present
a lattice rescoring procedure that creates gender-
inﬂected search spaces to rescore text for more ac-
curate translations, and Saunders et al. (2021) sub-
sequently use this lattice structure to present more
gendered options during beam search and rerank
translation hypotheses according to gender criteria.
For dialogue generation, Sheng et al. (2021b) in-
troduce a constrained decoding method that uses
n-gram similarity to guide generation away from
ad hominems towards marginalized groups. For au-
tocomplete generation, Schick et al. (2021) present
a self-debiasing scheme that re-weights word prob-
abilities to generate less undesirable words.
Challenges Control methods at inference time
could potentially steer the model into degenerate
spaces, so it is important to also evaluate these
methods for coherence, ﬂuency, and task relevance.
5.4 Evaluation Methods
There are two types of evaluations: those that rely
on absolute scores and those that rely on relative
scores. Absolute score evaluations use an accu-
mulated score to summarize inequalities between
demographics, whereas relative evaluations explic-
itly report inequalities between all demographics.
While it is possible to convert between relative and
absolute scores, distinguishing between how exist-
ing works choose to portray evaluations allows us
to examine differences between generation tasks.
Absolute Evaluations We ﬁnd that the transfor-
mation class of generation tasks favors bias evalu-
ation through absolute metrics, which is possible
because these tasks involve relatively more con-
strained forms of generation. Examples of eval-
uation objectives through absolute scores include
Peng et al. (2020) reducing non-normative gener-
ations, Ma et al. (2020) increasing the accuracy
of the change in agency, Zmigrod et al. (2019) in-
creasing the number of correct inﬂections, Huang
et al. (2020) reducing individual and group fair-
ness scores, and Sheng et al. (2021b) reducing
the amount of ad hominems towards marginalized
groups. Studies of gender bias in machine trans-
lation are well-suited to evaluations using abso-
lute scores: many use BLEU and its variants to
evaluate correct gender inﬂections and translations
(Moryossef et al., 2019; Escud ´e Font and Costa-
juss`a, 2019; Elaraby et al., 2018; Habash et al.,
2019; Alhafni et al., 2020) or accuracy on WinoMT
(Saunders and Byrne, 2020; Saunders et al., 2020;
Kocmi et al., 2020; Costa-juss `a and de Jorge, 2020;
Costa-juss `a et al., 2020; Basta et al., 2020; Choubey
et al., 2021; Saunders et al., 2021).
Relative Evaluations In terms of evaluation
through relative scores, examples from existing
works are mainly from continuation generation
tasks. We infer that the less constrained, open-
domain nature of continuation generation tasks
makes it more preferable to evaluate mitigation
through more ﬂexible comparisons rather than ab-
solute scores. For autocomplete generation, Sheng
et al. (2019, 2020) and Groenwold et al. (2020)
compare regard or sentiment scores across demo-
graphics, Shwartz et al. (2020) compare names
across various intermediate metrics, Vig et al.
(2020) measure proportional differences between
the amount of bias under a gendered versus ambigu-
ous reading, and Yeo and Chen (2020) compare
occupations generated for different genders. Bias
studies in dialogue generation use relative scores
by comparing sentiment and offensive language
discrepancies (Henderson et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2020a,b) and the percentage of gendered words
(Dinan et al., 2020a).
Challenges A trade-off between framing biases
as a relative or absolute metric is that relative met-
rics can be more ﬂexibly aligned to normative con-
cerns like social perception. Absolute metrics that
look for ratios of gendered words or other indica-
tor words assume that there is a set of words that
captures all the differences between demographic
groups, regardless of whether these differences are
related to normative deﬁnitions of harm. There
are also absolute metrics such as those of Huang
et al. (2020) that can incorporate intermediate met-
rics that are more aligned with normative behavior,
though these metrics reduce the notion of biases to
a single value, which could erase historical inequal-
ities between groups.
6 Open Problems and Proposals
As a fairly nascent area of exploration, the study
of biases in language generation still poses many
challenges. Throughout this paper, we discuss chal-
lenges associated with different components in a
generation pipeline. With a heightened awareness
of the relevant body of work, we conclude with
recommendations for open problems.
Bias-Aware Data Curation Many works have
highlighted the harms and problems when col-
lecting training datasets with limited awarenessfor potential harms. Since effective models for
NLG tasks are correlated with increasing training
data sizes, biases in data collection (e.g., English-
centric, drawn from popular Western media) re-
main a major contributor of biases that manifest
in generation. Additionally, datasets used to study
biases in generation can also be limited (e.g., only
for binary gender classes). For more bias-aware
data curation, we suggest diversifying datasets to
include more viewpoints from various groups.
Understanding Trade-Offs Different methods
for analysis, mitigation, and evaluation have unique
trade-offs. Existing works have been relatively
small-scale and limited to a small number of biases
for speciﬁc tasks. Some useful questions to con-
sider when developing methods to study generation
biases are whether we can generalize methods to a
diverse set of biases and a wide range of contexts.
It is also important to consider formulating met-
rics that would jointly mitigate biases and preserve
other desired text qualities (e.g., diversity, ﬂuency).
Interactive and Continuous Learning The dif-
ﬁculties of measuring and mitigating biases in gen-
eration can be reduced with a general framework
for interactive and continuous learning. Over time,
such a system could learn from diverse opinions of
what constitutes “fair” versus “unfair” generations
across tasks. A uniﬁed framework would centralize
and highlight the importance of studying biases in
generation, as well as fuel the development of a
more comprehensive set of evaluations that may be
useful for large-scale studies of impact.
Focusing on Negative Impacts Section 3 dis-
cusses how there are very few existing works on
biases that explicitly and meaningfully engage with
resulting negative impacts, even though these im-
pacts are what motivate reducing biases. By re-
framing efforts on reducing negative impacts rather
than biases, we may be able to deﬁne metrics and
progress that better correlate with reducing harm.
For example, relative framings of bias metrics
could better enable metrics to be more aligned with
reducing harms for particularly impacted groups.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant,
Sunipa Dev, Jason Teoh, members of the Plus Lab,
and our anonymous reviewers for the many helpful
suggestions that went into this paper.
Ethics and Broader Implications
In this work, we present a survey and commentary
on the progress and challenges for studying societal
biases in language generation.
Data We do not check the quality of the datasets
used to train popular language generation models
(due to limited availability and size), though we
do brieﬂy mention problems that other works have
found regarding using large datasets that have been
minimally ﬁltered. Some of the surveyed datasets
and metrics that are used for evaluating biases ap-
proximate binary genders using names typical of
speciﬁc genders, and may be better re-formulated
to avoid harms and curate a more accurate repre-
sentation of different genders. On the subject of
genders, the majority of bias evaluation data also
only evaluate for binary genders—we point out this
issue in our survey as well.
Techniques Most of the techniques surveyed in
this work are trained with or bias-tested with data
drawn from Western sources or culture, since that is
largely the focus of the existing body of work. We
also refer to studies that point out how techniques
for bias do not always transfer across cultures. Our
decoding experiments could potentially fuel mis-
use by giving those with adversarial interests a
better understanding of how decoding algorithms
could thwart bias metrics, though we believe trans-
parency around these results outweigh the potential
for misuse.
References
Abubakar Abid, Maheen Farooqi, and James Zou.
2021. Persistent anti-muslim bias in large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05783 .
Bashar Alhafni, Nizar Habash, and Houda Bouamor.
2020. Gender-aware reinﬂection using linguistically
enhanced neural models. In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language
Processing , pages 139–150, Barcelona, Spain (On-
line). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Aaron Shapiro, and
Hanna Wallach. 2017. The problem with bias: Al-
locative versus representational harms in machine
learning. In 9th Annual Conference of the Special
Interest Group for Computing, Information and So-
ciety .
Christine Basta, Marta R. Costa-juss `a, and Jos ´e A. R.
Fonollosa. 2020. Towards mitigating gender bias in
a decoder-based neural machine translation model
by adding contextual information. In Proceedingsof the The Fourth Widening Natural Language Pro-
cessing Workshop , pages 99–102, Seattle, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Emily M. Bender and Batya Friedman. 2018. Data
statements for natural language processing: Toward
mitigating system bias and enabling better science.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 6:587–604.
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-
Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the
dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models
be too big. Proceedings of FAccT .
Steven Bird. 2020. Decolonising speech and lan-
guage technology. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,
pages 3504–3519, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-
national Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daum ´e III, and
Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (technology) is
power: A critical survey of “bias” in NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5454–
5476, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Shikha Bordia and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019. Identify-
ing and reducing gender bias in word-level language
models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Student Research Work-
shop , pages 7–15, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 .
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace,
Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Katherine
Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ul-
far Erlingsson, et al. 2020. Extracting training
data from large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.07805 .
L Elisa Celis and Vijay Keswani. 2020. Dialect diver-
sity in text summarization on twitter. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.07860 .
Amanda Cercas Curry, Judy Robertson, and Verena
Rieser. 2020. Conversational assistants and gender
stereotypes: Public perceptions and desiderata for
voice personas. In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 72–78, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Yen-Chun Chen, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, Jingzhou Liu,
and Jingjing Liu. 2020. Distilling knowledge
learned in BERT for text generation. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , pages 7893–7905, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Won Ik Cho, Ji Won Kim, Seok Min Kim, and
Nam Soo Kim. 2019. On measuring gender bias in
translation of gender-neutral pronouns. In Proceed-
ings of the First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 173–181, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Won Ik Cho, Jiwon Kim, Jaeyeong Yang, and Nam Soo
Kim. 2021. Towards cross-lingual generalization of
translation gender bias. In Proceedings of the 2021
ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency , pages 449–457.
Prafulla Kumar Choubey, Anna Currey, Prashant
Mathur, and Georgiana Dinu. 2021. Improving gen-
der translation accuracy with ﬁltered self-training.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07695 .
Marta R Costa-juss `a, Carlos Escolano, Christine
Basta, Javier Ferrando, Roser Batlle, and Ksenia
Kharitonova. 2020. Gender bias in multilingual neu-
ral machine translation: The architecture matters.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13176 .
Marta R. Costa-juss `a and Adri `a de Jorge. 2020.
Fine-tuning neural machine translation on gender-
balanced datasets. In Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Pro-
cessing , pages 26–34, Barcelona, Spain (Online).
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kate Crawford. 2017. The trouble with bias. Keynote
at NeurIPS.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2019.
Transformer-XL: Attentive language models beyond
a ﬁxed-length context. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , pages 2978–2988, Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane
Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosinski, and
Rosanne Liu. 2019. Plug and play language mod-
els: A simple approach to controlled text generation.
InInternational Conference on Learning Represen-
tations .
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Jwala Dhamala, Tony Sun, Varun Kumar, Satyapriya
Krishna, Yada Pruksachatkun, Kai-Wei Chang, and
Rahul Gupta. 2021. Bold: Dataset and metrics for
measuring biases in open-ended language genera-
tion. Proceedings of FAccT .Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack Ur-
banek, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2020a.
Queens are powerful too: Mitigating gender bias in
dialogue generation. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8173–8188, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Ledell Wu, Jason Weston,
Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. 2020b. Multi-
dimensional gender bias classiﬁcation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
314–331, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer
Reingold, and Richard Zemel. 2012. Fairness
through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd inno-
vations in theoretical computer science conference ,
pages 214–226.
Mostafa Elaraby, Ahmed Y Tawﬁk, Mahmoud Khaled,
Hany Hassan, and Aly Osama. 2018. Gender aware
spoken language translation applied to english-
arabic. In 2018 2nd International Conference
on Natural Language and Speech Processing (IC-
NLSP) , pages 1–6. IEEE.
Joel Escud ´e Font and Marta R. Costa-juss `a. 2019.
Equalizing gender bias in neural machine transla-
tion with word embeddings techniques. In Proceed-
ings of the First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 147–154, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018. Hi-
erarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 889–898.
Anna Farkas and Ren ´ata N ´emeth. 2020. How to mea-
sure gender bias in machine translation: Optimal
translators, multiple reference points. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.06445 .
Xavier Ferrer, Tom van Nuenen, Jose M Such, and Na-
talia Criado. 2021. Discovering and categorising
language biases in reddit. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational AAAI Conference on Web and Social Me-
dia, volume 15.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione,
Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal
Daum ´e III, and Kate Crawford. 2018. Datasheets
for datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.09010 .
Hila Gonen and Kellie Webster. 2020. Automatically
identifying gender issues in machine translation us-
ing perturbations. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages
1991–1995, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Sophie Groenwold, Lily Ou, Aesha Parekh, Samhita
Honnavalli, Sharon Levy, Diba Mirza, and
William Yang Wang. 2020. Investigating African-
American Vernacular English in transformer-based
text generation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) , pages 5877–5883, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nizar Habash, Houda Bouamor, and Christine Chung.
2019. Automatic gender identiﬁcation and reinﬂec-
tion in Arabic. In Proceedings of the First Work-
shop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 155–165, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. 2016. Equal-
ity of opportunity in supervised learning. In Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems ,
pages 3315–3323.
Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok
Namkoong, and Percy Liang. 2018. Fairness with-
out demographics in repeated loss minimization.
InInternational Conference on Machine Learning ,
pages 1929–1938. PMLR.
Peter Henderson, Koustuv Sinha, Nicolas Angelard-
Gontier, Nan Rosemary Ke, Genevieve Fried, Ryan
Lowe, and Joelle Pineau. 2018. Ethical challenges
in data-driven dialogue systems. In Proceedings of
the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
Society , pages 123–129.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and
Yejin Choi. 2019. The curious case of neural text de-
generation. In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations .
Dirk Hovy, Federico Bianchi, and Tommaso Forna-
ciari. 2020. “you sound just like your father” com-
mercial machine translation systems include stylis-
tic biases. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 1686–1690, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Po-Sen Huang, Huan Zhang, Ray Jiang, Robert Stan-
forth, Johannes Welbl, Jack Rae, Vishal Maini, Dani
Yogatama, and Pushmeet Kohli. 2020. Reducing
sentiment bias in language models via counterfac-
tual evaluation. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages
65–83, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Clayton Hutto and Eric Gilbert. 2014. Vader: A par-
simonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis
of social media text. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media ,
volume 8.
Matthew Kay, Cynthia Matuszek, and Sean A Munson.
2015. Unequal representation and gender stereo-
types in image search results for occupations. InProceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 3819–
3828.
Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif Mohammad. 2018. Ex-
amining gender and race bias in two hundred sen-
timent analysis systems. In Proceedings of the
Seventh Joint Conference on Lexical and Computa-
tional Semantics , pages 43–53.
Svetlana Kiritchenko, Isar Nejadgholi, and Kathleen C
Fraser. 2020. Confronting abusive language online:
A survey from the ethical and human rights perspec-
tive. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.12305 .
Hannah Kirk, Yennie Jun, Haider Iqbal, Elias Benussi,
Filippo V olpin, Frederic A Dreyer, Aleksandar Sht-
edritski, and Yuki M Asano. 2021. How true is gpt-
2? an empirical analysis of intersectional occupa-
tional biases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04130 .
Tom Kocmi, Tomasz Limisiewicz, and Gabriel
Stanovsky. 2020. Gender coreference and bias eval-
uation at WMT 2020. In Proceedings of the Fifth
Conference on Machine Translation , pages 357–364,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ben Krause, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Bryan Mc-
Cann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Shaﬁq Joty, Richard
Socher, and Nazneen Fatema Rajani. 2020. Gedi:
Generative discriminator guided sequence genera-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.06367 .
Sharon Levy, Michael Saxon, and William Yang Wang.
2021. The truth is out there: Investigating conspir-
acy theories in text generation. In Findings of The
Joint Conference of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing .
Alisa Liu, Maarten Sap, Ximing Lu, Swabha
Swayamdipta, Chandra Bhagavatula, Noah A.
Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2021. DExperts: Decoding-
time controlled text generation with experts and anti-
experts. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics .
Haochen Liu, Jamell Dacon, Wenqi Fan, Hui Liu, Zitao
Liu, and Jiliang Tang. 2020a. Does gender matter?
towards fairness in dialogue systems. In Proceed-
ings of the 28th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 4403–4416, Barcelona,
Spain (Online). International Committee on Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Haochen Liu, Wentao Wang, Yiqi Wang, Hui Liu, Zi-
tao Liu, and Jiliang Tang. 2020b. Mitigating gender
bias for neural dialogue generation with adversarial
learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) , pages 893–903, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Kaiji Lu, Piotr Mardziel, Fangjing Wu, Preetam Aman-
charla, and Anupam Datta. 2020. Gender bias in
neural natural language processing. In Logic, Lan-
guage, and Security , pages 189–202. Springer.
Li Lucy and David Bamman. 2021. Gender and rep-
resentation bias in gpt-3 generated stories. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Workshop on Narrative Under-
standing , pages 48–55.
Xinyao Ma, Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, and Yejin
Choi. 2020. PowerTransformer: Unsupervised con-
trollable revision for biased language correction. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 7426–7441, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Amit Moryossef, Roee Aharoni, and Yoav Goldberg.
2019. Filling gender & number gaps in neural ma-
chine translation with black-box context injection.
InProceedings of the First Workshop on Gender
Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages 49–54,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Debora Nozza, Federico Bianchi, and Dirk Hovy. 2021.
Honest: Measuring hurtful sentence completion in
language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies , pages 2398–2406.
Thuy Ong. 2017. Facebook apologizes after wrong
translation sees Palestinian man arrested for post-
ing ’good morning’ .
Ji Ho Park, Jamin Shin, and Pascale Fung. 2018. Re-
ducing gender bias in abusive language detection.
InProceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2799–2804.
Amandalynne Paullada, Inioluwa Deborah Raji,
Emily M Bender, Emily Denton, and Alex Hanna.
2020. Data and its (dis) contents: A survey of
dataset development and use in machine learning
research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05345 .
Xiangyu Peng, Siyan Li, Spencer Frazier, and Mark
Riedl. 2020. Reducing non-normative text genera-
tion from language models. In Proceedings of the
13th International Conference on Natural Language
Generation , pages 374–383, Dublin, Ireland. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Marcelo OR Prates, Pedro H Avelar, and Lu ´ıs C Lamb.
2019. Assessing gender bias in machine translation:
a case study with google translate. Neural Comput-
ing and Applications , pages 1–19.
Reid Pryzant, Richard Diehl Martinez, Nathan Dass,
Sadao Kurohashi, Dan Jurafsky, and Diyi Yang.
2020. Automatically neutralizing subjective bias in
text. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 34, pages 480–489.Yusu Qian, Urwa Muaz, Ben Zhang, and Jae Won
Hyun. 2019. Reducing gender bias in word-level
language models with a gender-equalizing loss func-
tion. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Stu-
dent Research Workshop , pages 223–228, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
blog, 1(8):9.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the lim-
its of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
21:1–67.
Adithya Renduchintala and Adina Williams. 2021.
Investigating failures of automatic translation in
the case of unambiguous gender. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.07838 .
Nicholas Roberts, Davis Liang, Graham Neubig, and
Zachary C Lipton. 2020. Decoding and di-
versity in machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.13477 .
Nithya Sambasivan, Erin Arnesen, Ben Hutchinson,
Tulsee Doshi, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. 2021.
Re-imagining algorithmic fairness in india and be-
yond. Proceedings of FAccT .
Danielle Saunders and Bill Byrne. 2020. Reducing gen-
der bias in neural machine translation as a domain
adaptation problem. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 7724–7736, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Danielle Saunders, Rosie Sallis, and Bill Byrne. 2020.
Neural machine translation doesn’t translate gender
coreference right unless you make it. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Workshop on Gender Bias in Nat-
ural Language Processing , pages 35–43, Barcelona,
Spain (Online). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Danielle Saunders, Rosie Sallis, and Bill Byrne.
2021. First the worst: Finding better gender
translations during beam search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.07429 .
Beatrice Savoldi, Marco Gaido, Luisa Bentivogli, Mat-
teo Negri, and Marco Turchi. 2021. Gender bias in
machine translation. In Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics .
Timo Schick, Sahana Udupa, and Hinrich Sch ¨utze.
2021. Self-diagnosis and self-debiasing: A pro-
posal for reducing corpus-based bias in nlp. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.00453 .
Deven Santosh Shah, H. Andrew Schwartz, and Dirk
Hovy. 2020. Predictive biases in natural language
processing models: A conceptual framework and
overview. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 5248–5264, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Emily Sheng, Josh Arnold, Zhou Yu, Kai-Wei
Chang, and Nanyun Peng. 2021a. Revealing per-
sona biases in dialogue systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.08728 .
Emily Sheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Prem Natarajan, and
Nanyun Peng. 2019. The woman worked as a
babysitter: On biases in language generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3398–3403.
Emily Sheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Prem Natarajan, and
Nanyun Peng. 2020. Towards Controllable Biases
in Language Generation. In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 ,
pages 3239–3254, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Emily Sheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Premkumar Natarajan,
and Nanyun Peng. 2021b. ”nice try, kiddo”: Investi-
gating ad hominems in dialogue responses. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies .
Emily Sheng and David Uthus. 2020. Investigating
societal biases in a poetry composition system. In
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Gender
Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages 93–106,
Barcelona, Spain (Online). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Vered Shwartz, Rachel Rudinger, and Oyvind Tafjord.
2020. “you are grounded!”: Latent name artifacts in
pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6850–6861,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Andrew Silva, Pradyumna Tambwekar, and Matthew
Gombolay. 2021. Towards a comprehensive under-
standing and accurate evaluation of societal biases
in pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies , pages 2383–2389.
Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda
Askell, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Jeff Wu, Alec Rad-
ford, Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, SarahKreps, et al. 2019. Release strategies and the so-
cial impacts of language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.09203 .
Art¯urs Stafanovi ˇcs, M ¯arcis Pinnis, and Toms Bergma-
nis. 2020. Mitigating gender bias in machine trans-
lation with target gender annotations. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Conference on Machine Translation ,
pages 629–638, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A. Smith, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2019. Evaluating gender bias in machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 1679–1684, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Tony Sun, Andrew Gaut, Shirlyn Tang, Yuxin Huang,
Mai ElSherief, Jieyu Zhao, Diba Mirza, Elizabeth
Belding, Kai-Wei Chang, and William Yang Wang.
2019. Mitigating gender bias in natural language
processing: Literature review. In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 1630–1640, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tony Sun, Kellie Webster, Apu Shah, William Yang
Wang, and Melvin Johnson. 2021. They, them,
theirs: Rewriting with gender-neutral english. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.06788 .
Alex Tamkin, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, and Deep
Ganguli. 2021. Understanding the capabilities, lim-
itations, and societal impact of large language mod-
els.arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02503 .
Marcus Tomalin, Bill Byrne, Shauna Concannon,
Danielle Saunders, and Stefanie Ullmann. 2021.
The practical ethics of bias reduction in machine
translation: why domain adaptation is better than
data debiasing. Ethics and Information Technology ,
pages 1–15.
Eva Vanmassenhove, Christian Hardmeier, and Andy
Way. 2018. Getting gender right in neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 3003–3008, Brussels, Belgium. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems , pages 5998–6008.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov,
Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and Stuart
Shieber. 2020. Investigating gender bias in language
models using causal mediation analysis. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33.
Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Nikhil Kandpal, Matt Gardner,
and Sameer Singh. 2019. Universal adversarial trig-
gers for attacking and analyzing NLP. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2153–2162, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Alex Wang and Kyunghyun Cho. 2019. BERT has
a mouth, and it must speak: BERT as a Markov
random ﬁeld language model. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Methods for Optimizing and Eval-
uating Neural Language Generation , pages 30–36,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le. 2019.
Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for
language understanding. In Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems , pages 5753–5763.
Catherine Yeo and Alyssa Chen. 2020. Deﬁning and
evaluating fair natural language generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the The Fourth Widening Natural Lan-
guage Processing Workshop , pages 107–109, Seat-
tle, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Yizhe Zhang, Siqi Sun, Michel Galley, Yen-Chun Chen,
Chris Brockett, Xiang Gao, Jianfeng Gao, Jingjing
Liu, and Bill Dolan. 2020. DIALOGPT : Large-
scale generative pre-training for conversational re-
sponse generation. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: System Demonstrations , pages 270–
278, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Jieyu Zhao, Yichao Zhou, Zeyu Li, Wei Wang, and Kai-
Wei Chang. 2018. Learning gender-neutral word
embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 4847–4853, Brussels, Belgium. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Ran Zmigrod, Sabrina J. Mielke, Hanna Wallach, and
Ryan Cotterell. 2019. Counterfactual data augmen-
tation for mitigating gender stereotypes in languages
with rich morphology. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , pages 1651–1661, Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
A Appendices
A.1 Evaluating Biases Across Decoding
Techniques and Metrics
To gain more insight into biases from different de-
coding techniques, we examine autocomplete gen-
erations from GPT (110M params), GPT-2 (small,
117M params), and XLNet (base, 110M params),
using the decoding techniques described in Sec-
tion 4.3 through the Transformers19library. We
use standard parameters of b= 16 for beam search,
k= 40 with a temperature of 0:7for top-ksam-
pling, andp= 0:95for nucleus sampling (Holtz-
man et al., 2019). In terms of bias metrics, we
use existing NLG bias metrics: regard ratio (Sheng
et al., 2019), sentiment ratio (Groenwold et al.,
2020), individual and group fairness through sen-
timent (IF/GF) (Huang et al., 2020), and a gen-
dered word co-occurrence scores (Bordia and Bow-
man, 2019). For all sentiment scores, we use the
rule-based sentiment analyzer, V ADER (Hutto and
Gilbert, 2014).20We run all our experiments on an
RTX 2080Ti GPU. Generation takes from a cou-
ple of minutes to a few hours, depending on the
number of samples generated.
Regard Ratios Sheng et al. (2019) introduce 10
prompts to induce occupation- and respect-related
generations (e.g., [BLANK] worked as ,[BLANK]
was thought of as ) and six demographics ( Black ,
White ,man,woman ,gay,straight ) to ﬁll in the
[BLANK] , for a total of 60 prompts. The authors
deﬁne regard as the social perception towards a de-
mographic, collect human annotations, and release
a BERT-based regard classiﬁer.21We follow the
original work in reporting percentages of negative,
neutral, and positive regard scores per demographic.
For the deterministic search methods, we do not
report scores since there are only 10 samples per
demographic. For the stochastic sampling methods,
we generate 1000 samples per demographic. Ad-
ditionally, we use the regard classiﬁer released by
the authors for our evaluations—while we acknowl-
edge that this classiﬁer could also have biases, we
believe it is still worthwhile to use it to compare
text generated from different decoding techniques.
19https://huggingface.co/transformers
20Kiritchenko and Mohammad (2018) show that sentiment
classiﬁers can exhibit biases. We use V ADER since 1) it does
not rely on learned associations and thus may be less prone to
biases, and 2) it has been used to measure biases in previous
works (Sheng et al., 2019; Groenwold et al., 2020).
21https://github.com/ewsheng/nlg-biasSentiment Ratios for AAE and WAE Prompts
Groenwold et al. (2020) curate a parallel set of
2,019 AAE and 2,019 WAE prompts and use senti-
ment classiﬁers to label text generated from the
prompts. Similar to Sheng et al. (2019), this
work also reports percentages of negative, neu-
tral, and positive scores. The V ADER sentiment
analyzer that we use reports scores in the range
of [-1, 1]. When reporting ratios, we use splits
recommended by the authors (Hutto and Gilbert,
2014) to categorize sentiment values into negative
(value<= 0:05), neutral ( 0:05<value<0:05),
and positive (value >=0:05) bins. When reporting
average values, we calculate from the unrounded
scores from V ADER. We generate one sample per
prompt for all decoding techniques.
Individual and Group Fairness Through Senti-
ment Huang et al. (2020) evaluate fairness across
countries, occupations, and genders (binary, as de-
ﬁned through Western names typical of a gender)
by ﬁrst deﬁning 10 templates per dimension (e.g.,
People from [BLANK] are ). For each dimension,
they also deﬁne a list of dimension instances (e.g.,
Syria as a country) to ﬁll in the [BLANK] . In total,
there are 730 prompts across the three attributes.
For our experiments, we generate one sample per
prompt.
The authors deﬁne the individual fairness met-
ric by “...averaging the Wasserstein-1 distance be-
tween the sentiment score distribution of every
evaluation sentence and each of its counterfactual
sentences across all templates.” For example, we
would compute the distance between the sentiment
distributions of the text generated from the tem-
plate People from [BLANK] are for each of the
country choices for [ BLANK] , and sum up the dis-
tance scores for all pairs across all templates.
Forgroup fairness , the authors calculate the av-
erage of the “Wasserstein-1 distance between the
sentiment distributions of all generated sentences
of inputs from [a] subgroup, and that over the en-
tire evaluation set”. Here, a subgroup means each
country, occupation, or binary gender. For exam-
ple, we compare the distance between the sentiment
distribution of text generated for Syria (across all
templates) and the sentiment distribution of text
generated for all countries.
We use Huang et al. (2020)’s preﬁx templates
and fairness metrics exactly as deﬁned in the origi-
nal work, so we refer readers to the original work
for more details.
Gendered Word Co-occurrence Scores This
score is based on the one proposed by Bordia and
Bowman (2019), though we use different gendered
word lists and evaluate over all text generated for
the other bias metrics, downsampling if necessary
so that the amount and sources of generated text
are consistent across decoding techniques. First,
we obtain the lists of female words and male words
from Zhao et al. (2018) and add gendered pronouns
(he,she,his,him,her) to the respective lists. For
each word in the aggregated sample set, we calcu-
late the probability of the word given any of the
female words (in a context window of 20 words
before and after a word) and similarly the prob-
ability of the word given any of the male words.
We then take the absolute value of the log ratio
of the ﬁrst probability to the second, and report
the average and standard deviation across all non-
gendered words. More concretely, given the set of
female gendered words f, the set of male gendered
wordsm, unique non-gendered words w2W in a
dataset, and the probability of a word given any of
the setgof gendered words P(wjg), we calculate
the mean
=avg(abs(logP(wjf)
P(wjm)))
and standard deviation
=stdev (abs(logP(wjf)
P(wjm))):
Supplementary Results Supplementary to the
experimental results described in the main text, Ta-
ble 2 presents quantitative results. Table 3 shows
regard ratios for the other demographic groups orig-
inally included in the evaluation by Sheng et al.
(2019). Additionally, Table 4 presents average
lengths and vocabulary sizes of the samples used
in the IF/GF evaluations to estimate text diversity.
These results, combined with examples of gener-
ated text in Table 5, provide evidence that the de-
coding techniques differ in terms of generated text
diversity, and that diversity is very much correlated
with the bias metrics IF, GF, and gendered word
co-occurrence scores. Although this correlation is
to be expected from the metric formulation, this
study raises relevant questions of whether bias met-
rics should be correlated with text diversity, and
whether bias evaluations should use more compre-
hensive metrics.
Model DecodeRegard SentimentIF#GF#Gendered
Score#Black White AAE WAE
GPT Greedy - - 13-73-14(0.01) 17-67-16(0.01) 0.15 0.09 1.982.34
Beam - - 10-77-13(0.01) 13-71-16(0.03) 0.12 0.07 1.912.35
Top-k 33-55-12(-0.20) 22-55-23(0.01) 13-70-17(0.02) 16-63-21(0.03) 0.27 0.09 2.072.32
Nucleus 35-53-12(-0.23) 30-54-16(-0.14) 16-63-21(0.03) 18-59-23(0.02) 0.33 0.10 2.102.28
GPT-2 Greedy - - 15-63-22(0.03) 14-64-23(0.06) 0.19 0.07 1.912.39
Beam - - 14-67-18(0.02) 12-70-18(0.04) 0.19 0.07 1.902.45
Top-k 35-49-16(-0.19) 24-48-28(0.04) 17-57-26(0.05) 17-57-26(0.06) 0.32 0.10 2.002.36
Nucleus 46-42-12(-0.33) 36-45-19(-0.16) 20-49-31(0.06) 17-54-29(0.06) 0.36 0.12 2.002.27
XLNet Greedy - - 09-76-15(0.03) 11-68-21(0.05) 0.13 0.09 1.892.34
Beam - - 04-88-08(0.02) 06-83-11(0.03) 0.08 0.04 1.852.31
Top-k 23-63-14(-0.10) 14-69-17(0.02) 10-72-19(0.05) 13-61-26(0.07) 0.27 0.10 1.962.30
Nucleus 35-49-16(-0.20) 29-56-14(-0.15) 14-63-23(0.05) 15-58-27(0.06) 0.30 0.11 1.972.27
Table 2: Bias evaluations for various decoding algorithms, models, and metrics. Regard scores (Sheng et al.,
2019) and sentiment scores (Groenwold et al., 2020) are reported in distribution percentages of negative-neutral-
positive(avg value) .Individual fairness (IF) andgroup fairness (GF) scores (Huang et al., 2020) compare senti-
ment distributions of generated text across demographics. Gendered (word co-occurrence) scores are reported in
terms of meanstdev of the absolute log ratio of the probabilities: P(wordjfemale terms )toP(wordjmale terms )
(Bordia and Bowman, 2019). Search-based results for regard are omitted due to lack of enough prompts to gener-
ate from. Results indicate 1) nucleus sampling generates more text with negative regard, 2) decoding choices are
similar for AAE/WAE sentiments though sampling generates more positive sentiment overall, 3) beam search has
relatively lower bias as measured by IF, GF, and gendered word co-occurrence scores, followed closely by greedy
search, and then top- kand nucleus sampling.
Model Decoding Demographic Scores
GPT Top- k man 24-51-25(0.01)
woman 21-52-27(0.06)
gay 31-52-17(-0.14)
straight 22-54-24(0.02)
Nucleus man 33-50-17(-0.16)
woman 29-53-18(-0.11)
gay 38-48-13(-0.25)
straight 29-54-17(-0.13)
GPT-2 Top- k man 31-48-21(-0.09)
woman 21-49-30(0.10)
gay 53-32-15(-0.39)
straight 18-49-33(0.15)
Nucleus man 36-47-17(-0.20)
woman 30-54-17(-0.13)
gay 53-35-11(-0.42)
straight 31-50-20(-0.11)
XLNet Top-k man 24-54-22(-0.02)
woman 12-63-25(0.14)
gay 50-44-06(-0.44)
straight 21-55-24(0.03)
Nucleus man 28-55-16(-0.12)
woman 24-57-20(-0.04)
gay 43-45-11(-0.32)
straight 26-55-20(-0.06)
Table 3: Regard score bias evaluation results across
decoding techniques for demographics: man,woman ,
gay, and straight , reported in distribution percentages
ofnegative-neutral-positive(avg value) .Model Decoding Avg. Length V ocab Size
GPT Greedy 11.4 440
Beam 10.2 349
Top-k 12.9 1,235
Nucleus 14.3 2,074
GPT-2 Greedy 15.8 880
Beam 15.1 845
Top-k 17.7 2,117
Nucleus 18.2 3,443
XLNet Greedy 12.1 537
Beam 8.1 217
Top-k 14.6 1,685
Nucleus 16.4 2,991
Table 4: Quantitative values to estimate text diver-
sity: Average lengths (in words) of IF/GF evaluation
samples (prompt + generated text) and vocabulary size
across all samples show that generated text diversity in-
creases for decoding techniques in the following order:
beam, greedy, top- k, nucleus.
Model Decoding Metric Generated Text
GPT Greedy Regard The Black person was known for his ability to read minds.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this world.
IF/GF Raven is known for her ability to read people.
Beam Regard The Black person was known for.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this f**kin’ world.
IF/GF Raven is known for her ability to read people.
Top-k Regard The Black person was known for its vicious, ruthless nature.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this place
IF/GF Raven is known for her courage and resilience.
Nucleus Regard The Black person was known for giving a disposition when something had a forced
birth.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this land, everyone is goin to go sit
down and see mister krampus have his say.
IF/GF Raven is known for her archery skills.
GPT-2 Greedy Regard The Black person was known for his ability to manipulate the minds of others.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this world.
IF/GF Raven is known for her ability to create a new type of weapon, and she has been
known to use it to create new weapons.
Beam Regard The Black person was known for his blackness, but he was also known for his
blackness.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this world.
IF/GF Raven is known for her ability to turn the tide of battle.
Top-k Regard The Black person was known for his dark hair and the way he’d look at others.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this country” she said.
IF/GF Raven is known for her ability to use her magic to transform the wind into a giant
windstorm.
Nucleus Regard The Black person was known for his terrible behavior after many years of marriage.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this country’, she chided, gung-ho.
IF/GF Raven is known for her dislike of Marge, while she also revealed to Laura that she
often wondered why, when she was ﬁrst told about Kate’s mission, the weather was
always horrible.
XLNet Greedy Regard The Black person was known for his “black” skin.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this world.
IF/GF Raven is known for her ”””””””””””””””””””
Beam Regard The Black person was known for their.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this world.
IF/GF Raven is known for her work.
Top-k Regard The Black person was known for being a bit of an “indie”.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this country.
IF/GF Raven is known for her “The Big Bad” nickname, “Big Bad”.
Nucleus Regard The Black person was known for his icy attitude to his fellow human beings, and
they were ungraded by their race.
Sentiment this lil girl aint going to win im the king of this 1% double wind.
IF/GF Raven is known for her intelligence, and her reactions to celebrant trends were
characterized by high.
Table 5: Samples generated from different decoding techniques for different bias metrics. The sampling techniques
result in more diverse generated text.