Title: Know What You Don't Know: Unanswerable Questions for SQuAD

Know What You Don’t Know: Unanswerable Questions for SQuAD
Pranav RajpurkarRobin JiaPercy Liang
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
fpranavsr,robinjia,pliang g@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
Extractive reading comprehension sys-
tems can often locate the correct answer to
a question in a context document, but they
also tend to make unreliable guesses on
questions for which the correct answer is
not stated in the context. Existing datasets
either focus exclusively on answerable
questions, or use automatically generated
unanswerable questions that are easy to
identify. To address these weaknesses, we
present SQuAD 2.0, the latest version of
the Stanford Question Answering Dataset
(SQuAD). SQuAD 2.0 combines exist-
ing SQuAD data with over 50,000 unan-
swerable questions written adversarially
by crowdworkers to look similar to an-
swerable ones. To do well on SQuAD 2.0,
systems must not only answer questions
when possible, but also determine when no
answer is supported by the paragraph and
abstain from answering. SQuAD 2.0 is a
challenging natural language understand-
ing task for existing models: a strong neu-
ral system that gets 86% F1 on SQuAD 1.1
achieves only 66% F1 on SQuAD 2.0.
1 Introduction
Machine reading comprehension has become a
central task in natural language understanding, fu-
eled by the creation of many large-scale datasets
(Hermann et al., 2015; Hewlett et al., 2016; Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2016; Trischler
et al., 2017; Joshi et al., 2017). In turn, these
datasets have spurred a diverse array of model
architecture improvements (Seo et al., 2016; Hu
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017; Clark and Gard-
ner, 2017; Huang et al., 2018). Recent work has
The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this paper.Article: Endangered Species Act
Paragraph: “. . . Other legislation followed, including
the Migratory Bird Conservation Act of 1929, a 1937
treaty prohibiting the hunting of right and gray whales,
and the Bald Eagle Protection Act of 1940. These later
laws had a low cost to society—the species were rela-
tively rare—and little opposition was raised. ”
Question 1: “Which laws faced signiﬁcant opposition? ”
Plausible Answer: later laws
Question 2: “What was the name of the 1937 treaty? ”
Plausible Answer: Bald Eagle Protection Act
Figure 1: Two unanswerable questions written by
crowdworkers, along with plausible (but incorrect) an-
swers. Relevant keywords are shown in blue.
even produced systems that surpass human-level
exact match accuracy on the Stanford Question
Answering Dataset (SQuAD), one of the most
widely-used reading comprehension benchmarks
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016).
Nonetheless, these systems are still far from
true language understanding. Recent analysis
shows that models can do well at SQuAD by learn-
ing context and type-matching heuristics (Weis-
senborn et al., 2017), and that success on SQuAD
does not ensure robustness to distracting sen-
tences (Jia and Liang, 2017). One root cause of
these problems is SQuAD’s focus on questions for
which a correct answer is guaranteed to exist in the
context document. Therefore, models only need to
select the span that seems most related to the ques-
tion, instead of checking that the answer is actually
entailed by the text.
In this work, we construct SQuAD 2.0,1a new
dataset that combines answerable questions from
the previous version of SQuAD (SQuAD 1.1)
1In the ACL version of this paper, we called our new
dataset SQ UADRU N; here we use the name SQuAD 2.0, to
emphasize that it is in fact the new version of SQuAD.arXiv:1806.03822v1  [cs.CL]  11 Jun 2018
with 53,775 new, unanswerable questions about
the same paragraphs. Crowdworkers crafted these
questions so that (1) they are relevant to the para-
graph, and (2) the paragraph contains a plausible
answer —something of the same type as what the
question asks for. Two such examples are shown
in Figure 1.
We conﬁrm that SQuAD 2.0 is both challeng-
ing and high-quality. A state-of-the-art model
achieves only 66:3%F1 score when trained and
tested on SQuAD 2.0, whereas human accuracy
is89:5%F1, a full 23:2points higher. The same
model architecture trained on SQuAD 1.1 gets
85:8%F1, only 5:4points worse than humans.
We also show that our unanswerable questions are
more challenging than ones created automatically,
either via distant supervision (Clark and Gard-
ner, 2017) or a rule-based method (Jia and Liang,
2017). We release SQuAD 2.0 to the public as
new version of SQuAD, and make it the primary
benchmark on the ofﬁcial SQuAD leaderboard.2
We are optimistic that this new dataset will en-
courage the development of reading comprehen-
sion systems that know what they don’t know.
2 Desiderata
We ﬁrst outline our goals for SQuAD 2.0. Besides
the generic goals of large size, diversity, and low
noise, we posit two desiderata speciﬁc to unan-
swerable questions:
Relevance. The unanswerable questions should
appear relevant to the topic of the context para-
graph. Otherwise, simple heuristics (e.g., based on
word overlap) could distinguish answerable and
unanswerable questions (Yih et al., 2013).
Existence of plausible answers. There should
be some span in the context whose type matches
the type of answer the question asks for. For ex-
ample, if the question asks, “ What company was
founded in 1992? ”, then some company should
appear in the context. Otherwise, type-matching
heuristics could distinguish answerable and unan-
swerable questions (Weissenborn et al., 2017).
3 Existing datasets
Next, we survey existing reading comprehension
datasets with these criteria in mind. We use the
2As with previous versions of SQuAD, we release
SQuAD 2.0 under the CC BY-SA 4.0 license.term “negative example” to refer to a context pas-
sage paired with an unanswerable question.
3.1 Extractive datasets
In extractive reading comprehension datasets, a
system must extract the correct answer to a ques-
tion from a context document or paragraph. The
Zero-shot Relation Extraction dataset (Levy et al.,
2017) contains negative examples generated with
distant supervision. Levy et al. (2017) found that
65% of these negative examples do not have a
plausible answer, making them easy to identify.
Other distant supervision strategies can also
create negative examples. TriviaQA (Joshi et al.,
2017) retrieves context documents from the web or
Wikipedia for each question. Some documents do
not contain the correct answer, yielding negative
examples; however, these are excluded from the
ﬁnal dataset. Clark and Gardner (2017) generate
negative examples for SQuAD by pairing existing
questions with other paragraphs from the same ar-
ticle based on TF-IDF overlap; we refer to these as
TFIDFexamples. In general, distant supervision
does not ensure the existence of a plausible answer
in the retrieved context, and might also add noise,
as the context might contain a paraphrase of the
correct answer. Moreover, when retrieving from
a small set of possible contexts, as in Clark and
Gardner (2017), we ﬁnd that the retrieved para-
graphs are often not very relevant to the question,
making these negative examples easy to identify.
The NewsQA data collection process also yields
unanswerable questions, because crowdworkers
write questions given only a summary of an article,
not the full text (Trischler et al., 2017). Only 9:5%
of their questions are unanswerable, making this
strategy hard to scale. Of this fraction, we found
that some are misannotated as unanswerable, and
others are out-of-scope (e.g., summarization ques-
tions). Trischler et al. (2017) also exclude negative
examples from their ﬁnal dataset.
Jia and Liang (2017) propose a rule-based pro-
cedure for editing SQuAD questions to make them
unanswerable. Their questions are not very di-
verse: they only replace entities and numbers with
similar words, and replace nouns and adjectives
with WordNet antonyms. We refer to these unan-
swerable questions as R ULEBASED questions.
3.2 Answer sentence selection datasets
Sentence selection datasets test whether a system
can rank sentences that answer a question higher
Reasoning Description Example Percentage
NegationNegation word inserted
or removed.Sentence: “ Several hospital pharmacies have decided to
outsource high risk preparations . . . ”
Question: “ What types of pharmacy functions have never
been outsourced? ”9%
Antonym Antonym used.S: “the extinction of the dinosaurs. . . allowed the
tropical rainforest to spread out across the continent. ”
Q: “The extinction of what led to the decline of rainforests? ”20%
Entity SwapEntity, number, or date
replaced with other
entity, number, or date.S: “These values are much greater than the 9–88 cm
as projected . . . in its Third Assessment Report. ”
Q: “What was the projection of sea level increases in the
fourth assessment report ?”21%
Mutual
ExclusionWord or phrase is
mutually exclusive
with something for which
an answer is present.S: “BSkyB. . . waiv[ed] the charge for subscribers whose
package included two or more premium channels. ”
Q: “What service did BSkyB give away for free
unconditionally ?”15%
Impossible
ConditionAsks for condition that
is not satisﬁed by
anything in the paragraph.S: “Union forces left Jacksonville and confronted
a Confederate Army at the Battle of Olustee. . .
Union forces then retreated to Jacksonville
and held the city for the remainder of the war. ”
Q: “After what battle did Union forces leave
Jacksonville for good ?”4%
Other
NeutralOther cases where the
paragraph does not imply
any answer.S: “Schuenemann et al. concluded in 2011 that the
Black Death. . . was caused by a variant of Y. pestis. . . ”
Q: “Who discovered Y. pestis? ”24%
AnswerableQuestion is answerable
(i.e. dataset noise).7%
Table 1: Types of negative examples in SQuAD 2.0 exhibiting a wide range of phenomena.
than sentences that do not. Wang et al. (2007)
constructed the QAS ENT dataset from questions
in the TREC 8-13 QA tracks. Yih et al. (2013)
showed that lexical baselines are highly competi-
tive on this dataset. WikiQA (Yang et al., 2015)
pairs questions from Bing query logs with sen-
tences from Wikipedia. Like T FIDFexamples,
these sentences are not guaranteed to have plausi-
ble answers or high relevance to the question. The
dataset is also limited in scale (3,047 questions,
1,473 answers).
3.3 Multiple choice datasets
Finally, some datasets, like MCTest (Richard-
son et al., 2013) and RACE (Lai et al., 2017),
pose multiple choice questions, which can have
a “none of the above” option. In practice, mul-
tiple choice options are often unavailable, making
these datasets less suited for training user-facing
systems. Multiple choice questions also tend to
be quite different from extractive ones, with more
emphasis on ﬁll-in-the-blank, interpretation, and
summarization (Lai et al., 2017).
4 SQuAD 2.0
We now describe our new dataset, which we con-
structed to satisfy both the relevance and plausible
answer desiderata from Section 2.4.1 Dataset creation
We employed crowdworkers on the Daemo crowd-
sourcing platform (Gaikwad et al., 2015) to write
unanswerable questions. Each task consisted of
an entire article from SQuAD 1.1. For each para-
graph in the article, workers were asked to pose up
to ﬁve questions that were impossible to answer
based on the paragraph alone, while referencing
entities in the paragraph and ensuring that a plau-
sible answer is present. As inspiration, we also
showed questions from SQuAD 1.1 for each para-
graph; this further encouraged unanswerable ques-
tions to look similar to answerable ones. Workers
were asked to spend 7 minutes per paragraph, and
were paid $10.50 per hour. Screenshots of our in-
terface are shown in Appendix A.1.
We removed questions from workers who wrote
25 or fewer questions on that article; this ﬁlter
helped remove noise from workers who had trou-
ble understanding the task, and therefore quit be-
fore completing the whole article. We applied this
ﬁlter to both our new data and the existing an-
swerable questions from SQuAD 1.1. To gener-
ate train, development, and test splits, we used the
same partition of articles as SQuAD 1.1, and com-
bined the existing data with our new data for each
split. For the SQuAD 2.0 development and test
sets, we removed articles for which we did not
SQuAD 1.1 SQuAD 2.0
Train
Total examples 87,599 130,319
Negative examples 0 43,498
Total articles 442 442
Articles with negatives 0 285
Development
Total examples 10,570 11,873
Negative examples 0 5,945
Total articles 48 35
Articles with negatives 0 35
Test
Total examples 9,533 8,862
Negative examples 0 4,332
Total articles 46 28
Articles with negatives 0 28
Table 2: Dataset statistics of SQuAD 2.0, compared to
the previous SQuAD 1.1.
collect unanswerable questions. This resulted in
a roughly one-to-one ratio of answerable to unan-
swerable questions in these splits, whereas the
train data has roughly twice as many answerable
questions as unanswerable ones. Table 2 summa-
rizes overall statistics of SQuAD 2.0.
4.2 Human accuracy
To conﬁrm that our dataset is clean, we hired ad-
ditional crowdworkers to answer all questions in
the SQuAD 2.0 development and test sets. In each
task, we showed workers an entire article from the
dataset. For each paragraph, we showed all as-
sociated questions; unanswerable and answerable
questions were shufﬂed together. For each ques-
tion, workers were told to either highlight the an-
swer in the paragraph, or mark it as unanswer-
able. Workers were told to expect every paragraph
to have some answerable and some unanswerable
questions. They were asked to spend one minute
per question, and were paid $10.50 per hour.
To reduce crowdworker noise, we collected
multiple human answers for each question and se-
lected the ﬁnal answer by majority vote, breaking
ties in favor of answering questions and preferring
shorter answers to longer ones. On average, we
collected 4.8 answers per question. We note that
for SQuAD 1.1, Rajpurkar et al. (2016) evaluated a
single human’s performance; therefore, they likely
underestimate human accuracy.
4.3 Analysis
We manually inspected 100 randomly chosen neg-
ative examples from our development set to un-
derstand the challenges these examples present. In
Table 1, we deﬁne different categories of negativeexamples, and give examples and their frequency
in SQuAD 2.0. We observe a wide range of phe-
nomena, extending beyond expected phenomena
like negation, antonymy, and entity changes. In
particular, SQuAD 2.0 is much more diverse than
RULEBASED , which creates unanswerable ques-
tions by applying entity, number, and antonym
swaps to existing SQuAD 1.1 questions. We also
found that 93% of the sampled negative examples
are indeed unanswerable.
5 Experiments
5.1 Models
We evaluated three existing model architectures:
the BiDAF-No-Answer (BNA) model proposed by
Levy et al. (2017), and two versions of the Docu-
mentQA No-Answer (DocQA) model from Clark
and Gardner (2017), namely versions with and
without ELMo (Peters et al., 2018). These mod-
els all learn to predict the probability that a ques-
tion is unanswerable, in addition to a distribution
over answer choices. At test time, models abstain
whenever their predicted probability that a ques-
tion is unanswerable exceeds some threshold. We
tune this threshold separately for each model on
the development set. When evaluating on the test
set, we use the threshold that maximizes F1 score
on the development set. We ﬁnd this strategy does
slightly better than simply taking the argmax pre-
diction, possibly due to the different proportions
of negative examples at training and test time.
5.2 Main results
First, we trained and tested all three models on
SQuAD 2.0, as shown in Table 3. Following
Rajpurkar et al. (2016), we report average exact
match and F1 scores.3The best model, DocQA +
ELMo, achieves only 66:3F1 on the test set, 23:2
points lower than the human accuracy of 89:5F1.
Note that a baseline that always abstains gets 48:9
test F1; existing models are closer to this base-
line than they are to human performance. There-
fore, we see signiﬁcant room for model improve-
ment on this task. We also compare with reported
test numbers for analogous model architectures on
SQuAD 1.1. There is a much larger gap between
humans and machines on SQuAD 2.0 compared to
SQuAD 1.1, which conﬁrms that SQuAD 2.0 is a
much harder dataset for existing models.
3For negative examples, abstaining receives a score of 1,
and any other response gets 0, for both exact match and F1.
SystemSQuAD 1.1 test SQuAD 2.0 dev SQuAD 2.0 test
EM F1 EM F1 EM F1
BNA 68:0 77 :3 59:8 62 :6 59:2 62 :1
DocQA 72:1 81 :0 61:9 64 :8 59:3 62 :3
DocQA + ELMo 78 :6 85 :8 65 :1 67 :6 63 :4 66 :3
Human 82:3 91 :2 86:3 89 :0 86:9 89 :5
Human–Machine Gap 3:7 5 :4 21 :2 21 :4 23 :5 23 :2
Table 3: Exact Match (EM) and F1 scores on SQuAD 1.1 and 2.0. The gap between humans and the best tested
model is much larger on SQuAD 2.0, suggesting there is a great deal of room for model improvement.
SystemSQuAD 1.1 + T FIDF SQuAD 1.1 + R ULEBASED SQuAD 2.0 dev
EM F1 EM F1 EM F1
BNA 72:7 76 :6 80:1 84 :8 59:8 62 :6
DocQA 75:6 79 :2 80:8 84 :8 61:9 64 :8
DocQA + ELMo 79 :4 83 :0 85 :7 89 :6 65 :1 67 :6
Table 4: Exact Match (EM) and F1 scores on the SQuAD 2.0 development set, compared with SQuAD 1.1 with
two types of automatically generated negative examples. SQuAD 2.0 is more challenging for current models.
5.3 Automatically generated negatives
Next, we investigated whether automatic ways
of generating negative examples can also yield a
challenging dataset. We trained and tested all three
model architectures on SQuAD 1.1 augmented
with either T FIDFor R ULEBASED examples. To
ensure a fair comparison with SQuAD 2.0, we
generated training data by applying T FIDFor
RULEBASED only to the 285 articles for which
SQuAD 2.0 has unanswerable questions. We
tested on the articles and answerable questions in
the SQuAD 2.0 development set, adding unan-
swerable questions in a roughly one-to-one ratio
with answerable ones. These results are shown in
Table 4. The highest score on SQuAD 2.0 is 15:4
F1 points lower than the highest score on either of
the other two datasets, suggesting that automati-
cally generated negative examples are much easier
for existing models to detect.
5.4 Plausible answers as distractors
Finally, we measured how often systems were
fooled into answering the plausible but incorrect
answers provided by crowdworkers for our unan-
swerable questions. For both computer systems
and humans, roughly half of all wrong answers on
unanswerable questions exactly matched the plau-
sible answers. This suggests that the plausible an-
swers do indeed serve as effective distractors. Full
results are shown in Appendix A.2.
6 Discussion
SQuAD 2.0 forces models to understand whether
a paragraph entails that a certain span is the an-
swer to a question. Similarly, recognizing tex-tual entailment (RTE) requires systems to decide
whether a hypothesis is entailed by, contradicted
by, or neutral with respect to a premise (Marelli
et al., 2014; Bowman et al., 2015). Relation ex-
traction systems must understand when a possible
relationship between two entities is not entailed by
the text (Zhang et al., 2017).
Jia and Liang (2017) created adversarial test ex-
amples that fool models trained on SQuAD 1.1.
However, models that are trained on similar ex-
amples are not easily fooled by their method. In
contrast, the adversarial examples in SQuAD 2.0
are difﬁcult even for models trained on examples
from the same distribution.
In conclusion, we have presented SQuAD 2.0,
a challenging, diverse, and large-scale dataset that
forces models to understand when a question can-
not be answered given the context. We are op-
timistic that SQuAD 2.0 will encourage the de-
velopment of new reading comprehension models
that know what they don’t know, and therefore un-
derstand language at a deeper level.
Reproducibility. All code, data, experiments
are available on the CodaLab platform at https:
//bit.ly/2rDHBgY .
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank the
anonymous reviewers, Arun Chaganty, Peng Qi,
and Sharon Zhou for their constructive feedback.
We are grateful to Durim Morina and Michael
Bernstein for their help with the Daemo platform.
This work was supported by funding from Face-
book. R.J. is supported by an NSF Graduate Re-
search Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-114747.
References
S. Bowman, G. Angeli, C. Potts, and C. D. Manning.
2015. A large annotated corpus for learning natural
language inference. In Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP) .
C. Clark and M. Gardner. 2017. Simple and effec-
tive multi-paragraph reading comprehension. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.10723 .
S. N. Gaikwad, D. Morina, R. Nistala, M. Agarwal,
A. Cossette, R. Bhanu, S. Savage, V . Narwal, K. Ra-
jpal, J. Regino, et al. 2015. Daemo: A self-governed
crowdsourcing marketplace. In Proceedings of the
28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software & Technology . pages 101–102.
K. M. Hermann, T. Koisk, E. Grefenstette, L. Espe-
holt, W. Kay, M. Suleyman, and P. Blunsom. 2015.
Teaching machines to read and comprehend. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS) .
D. Hewlett, A. Lacoste, L. Jones, I. Polosukhin,
A. Fandrianto, J. Han, M. Kelcey, and D. Berthelot.
2016. Wikireading: A novel large-scale language
understanding task over Wikipedia. In Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
M. Hu, Y . Peng, and X. Qiu. 2017. Rein-
forced mnemonic reader for machine comprehen-
sion. arXiv .
H. Huang, C. Zhu, Y . Shen, and W. Chen. 2018. Fu-
sionnet: Fusing via fully-aware attention with appli-
cation to machine comprehension. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
R. Jia and P. Liang. 2017. Adversarial examples for
evaluating reading comprehension systems. In Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) .
M. Joshi, E. Choi, D. Weld, and L. Zettlemoyer. 2017.
TriviaQA: A large scale distantly supervised chal-
lenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
G. Lai, Q. Xie, H. Liu, Y . Yang, and E. Hovy.
2017. Race: Large-scale reading comprehen-
sion dataset from examinations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04683 .
O. Levy, M. Seo, E. Choi, and L. Zettlemoyer.
2017. Zero-shot relation extraction via reading com-
prehension. In Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL) .
M. Marelli, S. Menini, M. Baroni, L. Bentivogli,
R. bernardi, and R. Zamparelli. 2014. A SICK cure
for the evaluation of compositional distributional se-
mantic models. In Language Resources and Evalu-
ation Conference (LREC) .T. Nguyen, M. Rosenberg, X. Song, J. Gao, S. Tiwary,
R. Majumder, and L. Deng. 2016. MS MARCO:
A human generated machine reading comprehension
dataset. In Workshop on Cognitive Computing at
NIPS .
M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gard-
ner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer. 2018.
Deep contextualized word representations. In North
American Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (NAACL) .
P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang. 2016.
SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine compre-
hension of text. In Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) .
M. Richardson, C. J. Burges, and E. Renshaw. 2013.
Mctest: A challenge dataset for the open-domain
machine comprehension of text. In Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
pages 193–203.
M. Seo, A. Kembhavi, A. Farhadi, and H. Hajishirzi.
2016. Bidirectional attention ﬂow for machine com-
prehension. arXiv .
A. Trischler, T. Wang, X. Yuan, J. Harris, A. Sordoni,
P. Bachman, and K. Suleman. 2017. NewsQA: A
machine comprehension dataset. In Workshop on
Representation Learning for NLP .
M. Wang, N. A. Smith, and T. Mitamura. 2007. What is
the jeopardy model? a quasi-synchronous grammar
for QA. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) .
W. Wang, N. Yang, F. Wei, B. Chang, and M. Zhou.
2017. Gated self-matching networks for reading
comprehension and question answering. In Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
D. Weissenborn, G. Wiese, and L. Seiffe. 2017. Mak-
ing neural QA as simple as possible but not sim-
pler. In Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL) .
Y . Yang, W. Yih, and C. Meek. 2015. WikiQA: A chal-
lenge dataset for open-domain question answering.
InEmpirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP) . pages 2013–2018.
W. Yih, M. Chang, C. Meek, and A. Pastusiak. 2013.
Question answering using enhanced lexical seman-
tic models. In Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL) .
Y . Zhang, V . Zhong, D. Chen, G. Angeli, and C. D.
Manning. 2017. Position-aware attention and super-
vised data improve slot ﬁlling. In Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
A Supplementary material
A.1 Crowdsourcing details
Figure 2 shows the instructions that crowdworkers
were given at the beginning of each question writ-
ing task. Figure 3 shows the interface they used to
write unanswerable questions for each paragraph.
In the interface, workers ﬁrst write an unanswer-
able question, then highlight a plausible answer in
the paragraph.
A.2 Plausible answers as distractors
As mentioned in Section 5.4, we measured how
often systems were fooled into answering the
plausible answers provided by crowdworkers for
our unanswerable questions. For each system,
we ﬁrst isolated their false positive errors—cases
where they predicted an answer to an unanswer-
able question—on the development set. Within
this set of examples, we measured exact match
and F1 scores between the system predictions and
plausible answers. These numbers are shown in
Table 5. Plausible answers account for roughly
half of the false positive errors made by each of
the computer systems, as well as by human an-
swerers. We conclude that the plausible answers
in our dataset do indeed serve their purpose of be-
ing distracting spans that could be mistaken for the
correct answer.
EM F1
BNA 48.6 63.0
DocQA 55.0 69.9
DocQA +ELMo 54.9 69.2
Human 46.4 60.6
Table 5: Exact match (EM) and F1 scores between sys-
tem predictions and plausible answers, in cases where
the system made a false positive error.
Figure 2: The instructions shown to crowdworkers at the beginning of each question writing task.
Figure 3: The interface crowdworkers used to write unanswerable questions and annotate plausible answers.