Title: HellaSwag: Can a Machine Really Finish Your Sentence?

HellaSwag : Can a Machine Really Finish Your Sentence?
Rowan ZellersAri HoltzmanYonatan BiskAli Farhadi~Yejin Choi~
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
~Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
https://rowanzellers.com/hellaswag
Abstract
Recent work by Zellers et al. (2018) intro-
duced a new task of commonsense natural lan-
guage inference : given an event description
such as “A woman sits at a piano,” a machine
must select the most likely followup: “She
sets her ﬁngers on the keys.” With the intro-
duction of BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), near
human-level performance was reached. Does
this mean that machines can perform human
level commonsense inference?
In this paper, we show that commonsense in-
ference still proves di cult for even state-
of-the-art models, by presenting HellaSwag ,
a new challenge dataset. Though its ques-
tions are trivial for humans ( ¡95% accuracy),
state-of-the-art models struggle (  48%). We
achieve this via Adversarial Filtering (AF), a
data collection paradigm wherein a series of
discriminators iteratively select an adversarial
set of machine-generated wrong answers. AF
proves to be surprisingly robust. The key in-
sight is to scale up the length and complex-
ity of the dataset examples towards a critical
‘Goldilocks’ zone wherein generated text is
ridiculous to humans, yet often misclassiﬁed
by state-of-the-art models.
Our construction of HellaSwag , and its result-
ing di culty, sheds light on the inner work-
ings of deep pretrained models. More broadly,
it suggests a new path forward for NLP re-
search, in which benchmarks co-evolve with
the evolving state-of-the-art in an adversarial
way, so as to present ever-harder challenges.
1 Introduction
Imagine a woman chasing a dog around outside,
trying to give it a bath. What might happen next?
Humans can read a narrative like this, shown in
Figure 1, and connect it to a rich model of the
world: the dog is currently dry and not soapy, and
it actively doesn’t want to be bathed. Thus, one
A woman is outside with a bucket and a dog. The dog is running around trying to avoid a bath. She…A. rinses the bucket off with soap and blow dry the dog’s head.B. uses a hose to keep it from getting soapy.C. gets the dog wet, then it runs away again.D. gets into a bath tub with the dog.Come to a complete halt at a stop sign or red light. At a stop sign, come to a complete halt for about 2 seconds or until vehicles that arrived before you clear the intersection. If you're stopped at a red light, proceed when the light has turned green. …A. Stop for no more than two seconds, or until the light turns yellow. A red light in front of you indicates that you should stop.B. After you come to a complete stop, turn off your turn signal. Allow vehicles to move in different directions before moving onto the sidewalk.C. Stay out of the oncoming traﬃc. People coming in from behind may elect to stay left or right.D. If the intersection has a white stripe in your lane, stop before this line. Wait until all traﬃc has cleared before crossing the intersection.
OpenAIGPT
How to determine who has right of way. 
easy!???+
Adversarial Filtering+
Adversarial FilteringFigure 1: Models like BERT struggle to ﬁnish the sen-
tences in HellaSwag , even when they come from the
same distribution as the training set. While the wrong
endings are on-topic, with words that relate to the con-
text, humans consistently judge their meanings to be
either incorrect or implausible. For example, option A
of the WikiHow passage suggests that a driver should
stop at a red light for no more than two seconds .
plausible next event is option C—that she’ll get
the dog wet and it will run away again.
When the SWAG dataset was ﬁrst announced
(Zellers et al., 2018), this new task of common-
sense natural language inference seemed trivial
for humans (88%) and yet challenging for then-
state-of-the-art models (  60%), including ELMo
(Peters et al., 2018). However, BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018) soon reached over 86%, almost
human-level performance. One news article on
this development was headlined “ ﬁnally, a ma-
chine that can ﬁnish your sentence. ”1
In this paper, we investigate the following ques-
tion: How well do deep pretrained models, like
1A New York Times article at https: //nyti.ms /2DycutY.
1arXiv:1905.07830v1  [cs.CL]  19 May 2019
BERT, perform at commonsense natural language
inference (NLI)? Our surprising conclusion is
that the underlying task remains unsolved. In-
deed, we ﬁnd that deep models such as BERT do
not demonstrate robust commonsense reasonining
ability by themselves. Instead, they operate more
likerapid surface learners for a particular dataset.
Their strong performance on SWAG is dependent
on the ﬁnetuning process, wherein they largely
learn to pick up on dataset-speciﬁc distributional
biases. When the distribution of language shifts
slightly, performance drops drastically – even if
the domain remains identical.
We study this question by introducing Hella-
Swag ,2a new benchmark for commonsense
NLI. We use Adversarial Filtering (AF), a data-
collection paradigm in which a series of discrim-
inators is used to select a challenging set of gen-
erated wrong answers. AF is surprisingly e ec-
tive towards this goal: the resulting dataset of 70k
problems is easy for humans (95.6% accuracy),
yet challenging for machines (  50%q. This result
holds even when models are given a signiﬁcant
number of training examples, and even when the
test data comes from the exact same distribution
as the training data. Machine performance slips
an additional 5% when evaluated on examples that
cover novel concepts from the same domain.
To make this dataset robust to deep pre-
trained models, we use a trifecta of state-of-the-
art generators (Radford et al., 2018), state-of-
the-art discriminators (BERT), and high quality
source text. We expand on the SWAG’s origi-
nal video-captioning domain by using WikiHow
articles, greatly increasing the context diversity
and generation length. Our investigation reveals
a Goldilocks zone – roughly three sentences of
context, and two generated sentences – wherein
generations are largely nonsensical, even though
state-of-the-art discriminators cannot reliably tell
the di erence between these generations and the
ground truth.
More broadly, our paper presents a case-study
towards a future of veriﬁed progress in NLP, via it-
erative rounds of building and breaking datasets. If
our ultimate goal is to provide reliable benchmarks
for challenging tasks, such as commonsense NLI,
these benchmarks cannot be static. Instead, they
must evolve together with the evolving state-of-
2Short for Harder Endings, Longer contexts, and Low-
shot Activities for Situations WithAdversarial Generations.
Dataset and code at https: //rowanzellers.com /hellaswag.
Context 2Context 1
Context N…
Context 1Context M…Real ending…Real ending(N instances)(M instances)DtrainReal ending…Real endingReal ending
Gen’d ending K Gen’d ending K Gen’d ending K ……………Gen’d ending2 …Gen’d ending2 Gen’d ending2 Gen’d ending 1 …Gen’d ending 1 Gen’d ending 1 DtestGen’d ending2 …Gen’d ending 1…………Gen’d ending 2Gen’d ending 1 Gen’d ending K Gen’d ending K …
f
Train f to discriminate real vs. generated
Replace easily-classiﬁed generations with adversarial ones that currently aren’t includedGenerated Ending (context M)Generated Ending (context 2)New!New!Figure 2: An overview of Adversarial Filtering. On
each iteration, a new classiﬁer is trained on a dummy
training set Dtrainto replace easily-classiﬁed negative
endings on the dummy test set Dtestwith adversarial
endings. This process is repeated iteratively, to obtain
a challenging dataset regardless of the ﬁnal split.
the-art. Continued evolution in turn requires prin-
cipled dataset creation algorithms. Whenever a
new iteration of a dataset is created, these algo-
rithms must leverage existing modeling advance-
ments to ﬁlter out spurious biases. Only once this
cycle becomes impossible can we say that the un-
derlying task – as opposed an individual dataset –
is solved.
2 Background
SWAG is a dataset for commonsense NLI. For
each question, a model is given a context from a
video caption and four ending choices for what
might happen next. Only one choice is right – the
actual next caption of the video.
Obtaining interesting negatives is challenging.
Prior work (e.g. Gururangan et al., 2018; Poliak
et al., 2018) has found that when humans write the
endings to NLI questions, they introduce subtle
yet strong class-conditional biases known as an-
notation artifacts .3
To address this, Zellers et al. (2018) intro-
duced Adversarial Filtering (AF). An overview
is shown in Figure 2. The key idea is to produce
a dataset Dwhich is adversarial for anyarbitrary
split ofpDtrain,Dtestq. This requires a generator
of negative candidates (i.e., wrong endings that vi-
3These biases simply inﬂate model performance, but past
work has also shown that are unwanted social biases induced
when humans write the endings, in terms of gender and race
(Rudinger et al., 2015).
2
16 64 256 1024 4096 16384 65536
Training examples255075100SWAG1 Accuracy (%)
Human BERTLarge ESIM+ELMoFigure 3: Validation accuracy on SWAG for BERT-
Large versus training set size. The baseline (25% accu-
racy) is random chance. BERT does well given as few
as 16 training examples, but requires tens of thousands
of examples to approach human performance.
olate human notions about how the world works),
which we achieve by using a language model. Po-
tential candidates of incorrect answers were mas-
sively oversampled from a language model trained
on in-domain data, and then selected using an en-
semble of adversaries. The selection process hap-
pens iteratively: on each iteration, the dataset is
randomly partitioned into Dtrain andDtest. The
ensemble is trained to classify endings as real or
generated onDtrain, then, AF replaces easy-to-
classify generations in Dtest. This process con-
tinues until the accuracy of these adversaries con-
verges. Last, humans validate the data to remove
adversarial endings that seem realistic.
Importantly, AF creates a ﬁnal dataset that
is challenging to models regardless of the ﬁnal
dataset split. In Section 4, we will use AF as the
underlying workhorse to construct an NLI dataset
that is easy for humans, yet challenging for ma-
chines. This di culty persists even when mod-
els are provided signiﬁcant training data, and even
when this data comes from the same distribution
as the test set. This contrasts with past work on
adversarial examples (e.g. Jia and Liang, 2017;
Glockner et al., 2018; Belinkov and Bisk, 2018)
which consider cases where an out-of-distribution
test set is constructed to be adversarial.
3 Investigating SWAG
In this section, we investigate why SWAG was
solved. We focus on BERT, since it is the best
Default Ending Only Shuffled Shuffled+
Ending Only30405060708090100 BERT-Large Accuracy (%)86.7%
74.8%77.0%
60.4%
46.7%
41.4%
36.2%
31.6%SWAG
HellaSwagFigure 4: BERT validation accuracy when trained and
evaluated under several versions of SWAG, with the
new dataset HellaSwag as comparison. We compare:
Ending Only No context is provided; just the endings.
Shuffled Endings that are indidivually tokenized,
shued, and then detokenized.
Shuffled+
Ending OnlyNo context is provided andeach ending is
shued.
known approach at the time of writing.4Core to
our analysis is investigating how a model trained
on Wikipedia and books can be so e ectively ﬁne-
tuned for SWAG, a dataset from video captions.
3.1 How much innate knowledge does BERT
have about SWAG?
We investigate this question by measuring BERT’s
performance on SWAG while varying the size of
the training dataset; results are shown in Fig-
ure 3. While the best known ELMo NLI model
(ESIM +ELMo; Chen et al., 2017) requires the en-
tire training set to reach 59%, BERT outperforms
this given only 64 examples. However, BERT still
needs upwards of 16k examples to approach hu-
man performance, around which it plateaus.
3.2 What is learned during ﬁnetuning?
Figure 4 compares BERT’s performance when
trained and evaluated on variants of SWAG.
Context: BERT’s performance only slips 11.9
points (86.7%Ñ74.8%) when context is omitted
(Ending Only ), suggesting a bias exists in the
endings themselves.5If a followup event seems
unreasonable absent of context , then there must be
something markedly di erent between the space
of human-written and machine-generated endings.
Structure: To distinguish word usage from
4See the appendix for a discussion of the BERT architec-
ture and hyperparameter settings we used in our experiments.
5These biases are similar to those in NLI datasets, as
found by Gururangan et al. (2018); Poliak et al. (2018).
3
0 10 20 30 40 50
Activitynet Adversarial Filtering iteration0255075100BERT accuracy (4-way)
 Zellers' LM GPT
0 10 20 30 40
Wikihow Adversarial Filtering iteration0255075100BERT accuracy (4-way)
1 sentence
2 sentences
3 sentencesFigure 5: Adversarial Filtering (AF) results with BERT-Large as the discriminator. Left: AF applied to ActivityNet
generations produced by Zellers et al. (2018)’s language model versus OpenAI GPT. While GPT converges at
random, the LM used for SWAG converges at 75%. Right : AF applied to WikiHow generations from GPT, while
varying the ending length from one to three sentences. They converge to random, 40%, and50%, respectively.
structural patterns, we consider a new scenario,
Shuffled . Here the shared context is provided,
but the words in each ending choice are randomly
permuted. Surprisingly, this reduces BERT perfor-
mance by less than 10%. Even though BERT was
never exposed to randomly shu ed text during
pretraining, it easily adapts to this setting, which
suggests that BERT is largely performing lexical
reasoning over each (context, answer) pair.
Finally, when the context is removed and the
words in each ending are shu ed, performance
drops to 60.4%. While low, this is still higher
than ELMo’s performance (  60% from Zellers
et al., 2018). As neither context nor structure
is needed to discriminate between human and
machine-written endings in a majority of cases, it
is likely that systems primarily learn to detect dis-
tributional stylistic patterns during ﬁnetuning.
3.3 Where do the stylistic biases come from?
SWAG was constructed via Adversarial Filter-
ing (AF). Endings were generated via a language
model, and then selected to fool a discrimina-
tor. To understand why it was solved requires
understanding the interplay of AF with respect to
SWAG’s generators and discriminators.
Zellers et al. (2018) used a two-layer LSTM for
generation, with shallow stylistic adversarial ﬁl-
ters.6This setup was robust against ELMo mod-
els, but has the shallow LM in particular produced
distributional artifacts that BERT picks up on?
6The discriminator was an ensemble that featured a bag
of words model, a shallow CNN, a multilayer perceptron op-
erating on language model perplexities.To investigate this, we perform AF using BERT-
Large as the discriminator7in two settings, com-
paring generations from Zellers et al. (2018) with
those from a ﬁnetuned GPT (Radford et al., 2018).
Strikingly, the results, Figure 5 (left), show that
the generations used in SWAG are so di erent
from the human-written endings that AF never
drops the accuracy to chance ; instead, it converges
to roughly 75%. On the other hand, GPT’s gener-
ations are good enough that BERT accuracy drops
below 30% over many random subsplits of the
data, revealing the importance of the generator.
4HellaSwag
The success of BERT implies that high-quality
generators and discriminators are crucial to AF’s
success. However, it does notimply that the un-
derlying task of commonsense NLI – as opposed
to a single dataset – is solved. To evaluate this
claim requires us to try making a new evolution
of the SWAG dataset, one in which artifacts are
removed. In this section, we do just that by intro-
ducing HellaSwag .
4.1 ActivityNet Captions
We start by including video captions from the
ActivityNet Captions dataset (Krishna et al.,
2017). The original SWAG dataset contains these,
along with captions from LSMDC (Rohrbach
et al., 2017), but for HellaSwag we solely used
7On each iteration, BERT-Large is re-initialized from its
pretrained checkpoint, ﬁnetuned, and then evaluated in a
four-way setting on the dummy test set of held-out data. See
Supp A for a details of our BERT-Large AF setup.
4
ActivityNet. In addition to temporal descriptions,
ActivityNet also provides activity labels for each
caption (e.g. jumping rope ). We will use these
activity labels as additional structure to test gener-
alization ability.
4.2 WikiHow: A New Testbed
We next consider a new and challenging testbed
for commonsense reasoning: completing how-to
articles from WikiHow, an online how-to manual.
We scrape 80k context and follow-up paragraphs
from WikiHow, covering such diverse topics as
“how to make an origami owl” to “how to survive
a bank robbery.” Each context has at most three
sentences, as do the follow-ups.
AF’s e ectiveness in this new setting is shown
in Figure 5 (right). We consider three settings,
corresponding to endings that are either one, two,
or three sentences long. In all cases, BERT per-
formance begins high (70-90%), but there are
enough generations for Adversarial Filtering to
lower the ﬁnal accuracy considerably. While the
one-sentence case converges to slightly higher
than random – 35% when it converges – the two
and three sentence cases are higher, at 40% and
50% respectively. Given more context, it becomes
easier to classify an ending as machine- or human-
written. We compromise and use two-sentence
generations. Particularly in the two-sentence case,
we ﬁnd ourselves in a Goldilocks zone wherein
generations are challenging for deep models, yet
as we shall soon see, easy for humans.
4.3 Obtaining high human agreement
How well can humans distinguish human-written
endings from machine generations reﬁned with
Adversarial Filtering? In Figure 6, we com-
pare human performance with that of BERT on
a random 80% /20% split. We see a contrast
between the ActivityNet and WikiHow perfor-
mance. While ActivityNet starts o harder for
BERT (25.5%), it also proves di cult for humans
(60%). In contrast, WikiHow starts easier for
BERT (41.1%) and humans ﬁnd the domain al-
most trivial (93.5%). We hypothesis this discrep-
ancy is due to the lengths of both datasets (Fig-
ure 7). WikiHow’s 2-sentence generations average
41 tokens, versus 13 for ActivityNet. This gives
WikiHow generations three times as many oppor-
tunities to make a detectable mistake.
To ensure high agreement on ActivityNet, we
perform several rounds of human ﬁltering, in-
0 1 2255075100Accuracy (%)
25.548.457.160.085.094.0ActivityNet
0 1 2
41.145.4 46.093.595.5 96.5WikiHow
Human
BERT
Number of annotators during validationFigure 6: For HellaSwag , we ensure high human agree-
ment through several rounds of annotation. By collect-
ing how likely each ending is we can ﬁlter false nega-
tive endings – machine generations that sound realistic
– and replace them with true negatives. On both sub-
datasets, BERT performance increases during valida-
tion, but the gap to human performance remains wide.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Length (# WordPiece tokens)0.020.040.060.08Context lengths for...
ActivityNet
WikiHow (2sent)
0 20 40 60 80 100
Length (# WordPiece tokens)Ending lengths for...
ActivityNet
WikiHow (2sent)
Figure 7: Lengths of ActivityNet and WikiHow; the
latter with two-sentence generations. WikiHow is
much longer, which corresponds to being easier for hu-
mans, while taking longer for AF to converge.
creasing human performance to 94%. During hu-
man validation, crowd workers are given a context
and six ending choices, of which one is the true
ending, and the other ﬁve are from AF. On each
iteration, we replace machine-written endings that
the worker rated as realistic with new samples. In
the end, we keep the 25k best ActivityNet contexts
(i.e. those with highest agreement among workers
8) and the 45k best WikiHow contexts.
4.4 Zero-shot categories for evaluation
To evaluate a model’s ability to generalize to new
situations, we use category labels from WikiHow
and ActivityNet to make ‘zero-shot’ evaluation
sets. For each set (validation or test), we craft two
subsets: one containing 5k ‘in-domain’ examples
that come from categories as seen during training
(Figure 8), and another with 5k ‘zero-shot’ exam-
ples from randomly chosen held-out categories. In
total, there are 70k dataset examples.
8See the appendix for details about how we estimate this.
5
Overall In-Domain Zero-Shot ActivityNet WikiHow
Model Val Test Val Test Val Test Val Test Val Test
Split Size Ñ 10K 10K 5K 5K 5K 5K 3.2K 3.5K 6.8K 6.5K
Chance 25.0
fastText 30.9 31.6 33.8 32.9 28.0 30.2 27.7 28.4 32.4 33.3
LSTM +GloVe 31.9 31.7 34.3 32.9 29.5 30.4 34.3 33.8 30.7 30.5
LSTM +ELMo 31.7 31.4 33.2 32.8 30.4 30.0 33.8 33.3 30.8 30.4
LSTM +BERT-Base 35.9 36.2 38.7 38.2 33.2 34.1 40.5 40.5 33.7 33.8
ESIM +ELMo 33.6 33.3 35.7 34.2 31.5 32.3 37.7 36.6 31.6 31.5
OpenAI GPT 41.9 41.7 45.3 44.0 38.6 39.3 46.4 43.8 39.8 40.5
BERT-Base 39.5 40.5 42.9 42.8 36.1 38.3 48.9 45.7 34.9 37.7
BERT-Large 46.7 47.3 50.2 49.7 43.3 45.0 54.7 51.7 42.9 45.0
Human 95.7 95.6 95.6 95.6 95.8 95.7 94.0 94.0 96.5 96.5
Table 1: Performance of models, evaluated with accuracy (%).We report results on the full validation and test sets
(Overall), as well as results on informative subsets of the data: evaluated on in-domain, versus zero-shot situations,
along with performance on the underlying data sources (ActivityNet versus WikiHow). All models substantially
underperform humans: the gap is over 45% on in-domain categories, and 50% on zero-shot categories.
Figure 8: Examples on the in-domain validation set of
HellaSwag , grouped by category label. Our evaluation
setup equally weights performance on categories seen
during training as well as out-of-domain.
5 Results
We evaluate the di culty of HellaSwag using a va-
riety of strong baselines, with and without mas-
sive pretraining. The models share the same for-
mat: given a context and an ending, return a logit
for that ending. Accordingly, we train our models
using a four-way cross-entropy loss, where the ob-
jective is to predict the correct ending. In addition
to BERT-Large, our comparisons include:
a.OpenAI GPT (Radford et al., 2018): A ﬁne-
tuned 12-layer transformer that was pre-trained on
the BookCorpus (Zhu et al., 2015).
b.Bert-Base : A smaller version of the BERT
model whose architecture size matches GPT.
c.ESIM +ELMo (Chen et al., 2017; Peters et al.,
2018): This is the best-performing ELMo model
for NLI, modiﬁed slightly so the ﬁnal output layeris now a four-way softmax over endings.
d.LSTM sentence encoder : This is a randomly
initialized two-layer bi-LSTM; the second layer’s
hidden states are max-pooled and fed into an MLP
to predict the logit. We consider three varia-
tions: GloVe embeddings, ELMo embeddings, or
(frozen) BERT-Base embeddings.9
e.FastText : (Joulin et al., 2017) An o -the-shelf
library for bag-of-words text classiﬁcation.10
We compare all models to human performance
by asking ﬁve independent crowd workers to solve
the same four-way multiple choice problems; their
predictions are combined via majority vote.
Our results, shown in Table 1, hint at the di -
culty of the dataset: human performance is over
95%, while overall model performance is below
50% for every model. Surprisingly, despite BERT-
Large having been used as the adversarial ﬁlter,
it still performs the strongest at 47.3% overall.
By making the dataset adversarial for BERT, it
seems to also have become adversarial for every
other model. For instance, while ESIM +ELMo
obtained 59% accuracy on SWAG, it obtains only
33.3% accuracy on HellaSwag .
In addition to pretraining being critical, so too is
end-to-end ﬁnetuning. Freezing BERT-Base and
adding an LSTM on top lowers its overall perfor-
mance 4.3%. This may help explain why mod-
els such as ESIM +ELMo struggled on SWAG, as
ELMo isn’t updated during ﬁnetuning.
While BERT is the best model, it still struggles
onHellaSwag , and especially so on zero-shot cat-
9For ELMo and BERT-Base, the model learns scalar
weights to combine each internal layer of the encoder.
10This model is trained with binary cross entropy loss.
6
Overall LSMDC ActivityNet30405060708090100 BERT-Large Accuracy (%)86.7%85.5%88.0%
71.4%69.0%74.2%Evaluated on SWAG
Overall WikiHow ActivityNet34.6%
28.0%48.4%46.4%
42.9%53.7%Evaluated on HellaSwag
Trained on...
SWAG
HellaSwagFigure 9: Transfer experiments from SWAG to Hella-
Swag and vice versa, evaluated on the validation sets.
Overall, a BERT-Large that is trained on SWAG hardly
generalizes to HellaSwag : it scores 34.6%.
egories. Performance drops roughly 5% on the
test fold, which suggests that the ﬁnetuning is not
enough for BERT to learn to generalize to novel
activities or how-to categories.
Last, we see that WikiHow is a much harder do-
main that ActivityNet for machines: 45% Bert-
Large performance, versus 96.5% for humans.
Curiously, it is on this source dataset that we see
the smallest gap between OpenAI GPT and BERT.
In fact, OpenAI GPT outperforms BERT on Wiki-
How, but the reverse is true for ActivityNet. One
possibility is that the left-to-right structure of GPT
is the right inductive bias for WikiHow - perhaps
reasoning bidirectionally over long contexts is too
much for a 12-layer transformer to learn.
5.1 SWAG to HellaSwag transfer
Given the shared goals and partial domains of
SWAG and HellaSwag , it is natural to ask to
what extent models can transfer between the two
datasets. In Figure 9 we show the results from
transfer experiments: models are trained on one
dataset and evaluated on the other.11
The best models are trained on the same
dataset that they are evaluated on: training on
SWAG and evaluating on HellaSwag lowers per-
formance by 12%; vice versa lowers performance
by 15%. The missing domain for HellaSwag mod-
els is movie descriptions (LSMDC), still, Hella-
Swag models obtain 69% accuracy. On the other
hand, SWAG models do not generalize at all to
their missing domain, WikiHow (28%), suggest-
ing that learning general commonsense reasoning
11Note that the ActivityNet splits are di erent for each
dataset. To avoid skewing the results, we report only on
the validation video captions that are not in the training sets
of either dataset. The overall accuracy is then a weighted
average, where ActivityNet examples are weighted propor-
tionately more. This gives a slight advantage to training on
SWAG, as it sees all the ActivityNet categories when training.Category : Shaving (ActivityNet; In-domain)
A bearded man is seen speaking to the camera and making several
faces. the man
a) then switches o and shows himself via the washer and dryer
rolling down a towel and scrubbing the ﬂoor. (0.0%)
b) then rubs and wipes down an individual’s face and leads into
another man playing another person’s ﬂute. (0.0%)
c) is then seen eating food on a ladder while still speaking. (0.0%)
d)then holds uparazorandbegins shav inghisface. (100.0%)
Category : Sharpening knives (ActivityNet; Zero-Shot)
Two men are in a room and the man with a blue shirt takes out a
bench stone and with a little lubricant on the stone takes an knife and
explains how to sharpen it. then he
a)uses asharp ener tosmooth outthestone usingtheknife.
(100.0%)
b) shows how to cut the bottom with the knife and place a tube on
the inner and corner. (0.0%)
c) bends down and grabs the knife and remove the appliance.
(0.0%)
d)stops sharp eningtheknife andtakes outsome pieces ofpaper
toshow how sharp theknife isashecuts sliversofpaperwith
theknife. (0.0%)
Category : Youth (WikiHow; In-Domain)
How to make up a good excuse for your homework not being finished
Blame technology. One of the easiest and most believable ex-
cuses is simply blaming technology. You can say your computer
crashed, your printer broke, your internet was down, or any number of
problems.
a) Your excuses will hardly seem believable. [substeps] This
doesn’t mean you are lying, just only that you don’t have all the
details of how your computer ran at the time of the accident. (0.0%)
b) The simplest one to have in a classroom is to blame you entire
classroom, not just lab. If you can think of yourself as the victim,
why not blame it on technology. (9.4%)
c)Most people, your teacher included, have experienced set-
backs duetotechnologicalprob lems. [substeps] This isagreat
excuse ifyouhadapaperyouneeded totype andprint. (29.1%)
d)Itmay alsobemore believableifyouarefully aware thatyoumay
beﬂyingathigh speed onaplane andneed some onetogive you
trafﬁcreport. Your problemmight beyour laptopfailingtocharge
afteralong ﬂight. (61.5%)
Figure 10: Example questions answered by BERT-
Large. Correct model predictions are blue, incorrect
predictions are red. The right answers are bolded .
was hardly necessary to solve SWAG.
5.2 Qualitative examples
We show several qualitative examples in Fig-
ure 10, along with BERT-Large’s predictions.
BERT does well on some ActivityNet contexts,
such as in the ﬁrst row, where it correctly pre-
dicts the ending for a shaving caption. Whereas
shaving is in-domain, the second example about
sharpening knives is zero-shot. In this con-
text, BERT’s answer suggests that one would use
a knife to sharpen a stone, rather than vice versa.
The last example comes from WikiHow, which
appears to be incredibly challenging for BERT.
BERT picks answer d, which has more words that
match the context of technology (planes, tra c,
laptop), but is incoherent.12
12Among other issues, why would someone suddenly be
aware that they are ‘ﬂying at high speed on a plane...?’
7
Stylistic
EnsembleELMo+
LSTMGPT BERTBase BERTLarge30405060708090100 Accuracy (%)
48.2%53.7%64.8%71.4%83.0%
28.0% 28.2% 28.4%32.0%41.1%78.5%77.4%
71.3%
63.0%
41.1%Accuracy of the filtering model before AF
Accuracy of the filtering model after AF
BERT-Large accuracy after AFFigure 11: Performance on the WikiHow subset of al-
ternative variations of HellaSwag , where di erent Ad-
versarial Filters are used (but without human valida-
tion). We consider the shallow stylistic adversaries
used by Zellers et al. (2018) (Stylistic Ensemble),
as well as an LSTM with ELMo embeddings, GPT,
BERT-Base, and BERT-Large. For each adversarial ﬁl-
tering model, we record the accuracy of that model be-
fore and after AF is used. We also evaluate each al-
ternative dataset using BERT-Large. The results sug-
gest that using a a stronger model at test time (over the
model used for AF) improves performance, but is not
enough to solve the task.
6 Discussion
Our results suggest that HellaSwag is a challenging
testbed for state-of-the-art NLI models, even those
built on extensive pretraining. The question still
remains, though, of where will the ﬁeld go next?
6.1 How easy might HellaSwag be for future
discriminators?
In this paper, we showed the existence of a
Goldilocks zone of text complexity – in which
generations are nonsensical, but existing state-
of-the-art NLP models cannot tell the di erence.
How hard will the dataset be for future, even more
powerful, models?
Answering this question is challenging because
these models don’t exist (or are unavailable) at
the time of writing . However, one remedy is to
perform an ablation study on the Adversarial Fil-
tering model used, comparing weaker ﬁlters with
stronger discriminators. We present our results
in Figure 11, and ﬁnd that while weak discrim-
inators (like the stylistic ensemble used to make
SWAG) only marginally reduce the accuracy of
BERT-Large, increasing the gap between the ﬁlter
and the ﬁnal discriminator is not enough to solve
the task. For instance, using a discriminator with
3x the parameters as the adversarial ﬁlter (BERT-
Large vs. BERT-Base) results in 63% machine ac-
curacy.
30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Overall Accuracy on HellaSwag1021041061081010Pretraining Hours (Estimate)
Human performance?
ELMoGPTBERT-BaseBERT-LargeFigure 12: Estimated pretraining hours required to
reach a desired accuracy on HellaSwag . We estimate
perfomance with respect to a RTX 2080 Ti - a modern,
fast GPU, and ﬁt a log-linear regression line. An ex-
trapolation suggests that to reach human-level perfor-
mance on HellaSwag , without algorithmic or computa-
tional improvements, would require 109GPU-hours of
pretraining (over 100k GPU years).
6.2 How well does pretraining scale?
Overall, the current paradigm of pretraining large
models on lots of data has made immense progress
on NLP benchmarks. Though we expect this
trend to continue, it also behooves us to con-
sider its limits. If more compute is indeed the
answer for human-level commonsense inference,
what would the compute requirements of this hy-
pothetical massive model look like?
We investigate this in Figure 12 by compar-
ing the accuracies of known models on Hella-
Swag with their computational needs. This estima-
tion is a rough estimate: we convert reported TPU
runtimes to our benchmark RTX 2080 Ti GPU us-
ing the Rooﬂine model (Williams et al., 2009),
which focuses primarily on the bottleneck of load-
ing tensors into GPU memory. Extrapolating from
an exponential ﬁt suggests that reaching human-
level performance on our dataset would require
109GPU hours, or 100k years – unless algorith-
mic improvements are made.
What might these algorithmic improvements
look like? These could include architectural ad-
vances, better pretraining objectives, and beyond.
However, these improvements share the bottle-
neck of the data source. To answer some Hella-
Swag questions correctly without reasoning deeply
– like knowing that it is a bad idea to stop at a
red light for ‘at most two seconds’ – might require
an exponential number of samples, due to prob-
8
lems of reporting bias (Gordon and Van Durme,
2013). Alternatively, future models might answer
correctly only by picking up on spurious patterns,
in which case a new development of the bench-
mark – using these models as adversaries – would
place us in the same position as we are right now.
Put another way, for humans to answer Hella-
Swag questions requires abstracting away from
language and modeling world states instead. We
postulate that this is what separates solving the
task of commonsense NLI, as opposed to a par-
ticular dataset. Indeed, we ﬁnd that existing deep
methods often get fooled by lexical false friends.
For example, in the WikiHow example from Fig-
ure 10, BERT chooses an ending that matches
thetechnology words in the context, rather than
matching the deeper topic: using technology as an
excuse for not doing homework.
6.3 Towards a future of evolving benchmarks
What happens when HellaSwag gets solved? We
believe the answer is simple: crowdsource another
dataset, with the same exact format, and see where
models fail. Indeed, in our work we found this to
be straightforward from an algorithmic perspec-
tive: by throwing in the best known generator
(GPT) and the best known discriminator (BERT-
Large), we made a dataset that is adversarial - not
just to BERT, but to all models we have access to.
While this was easy algorithmically, care must
be taken from a data curation standpoint. Indeed,
we ﬁnd success exists within a Goldilocks zone:
the data source must be complex enough that state-
of-the-art generators often make mistakes, while
simple enough such that discriminators often fail
to catch them. This ties the future of SWAG-
style benchmarks to progress on language gener-
ation: until generation is solved, commonsense
NLI will remain unsolved. Even recent promis-
ing results on scaling up language models (Rad-
ford et al., 2019) ﬁnd problems in terms of consis-
tency, with the best curated examples requiring 25
random seeds.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented HellaSwag , a new
dataset for physically situated commonsense rea-
soning. By constructing the dataset through ad-
versarial ﬁltering, combined with state-of-the-art
models for language generation and discrimina-
tion, we produced a dataset that is adversarial tothe most robust models available – even when
models are evaluated on items from the train-
ing distribution. In turn, we provided insight
into the inner workings of pretrained models, and
suggest a path for NLP progress going forward:
towards benchmarks that adversarially co-evolve
with evolving state-of-the-art models.
Acknowledgments
We thank the reviewers, as well as Jesse Thoma-
son, for their helpful feedback. We thank the
Mechanical Turk workers for their great work
during dataset collection. Thanks also to Zak
Stone and the Google Cloud TPU team for help
with the computing infrastructure. This work
was supported by the National Science Foundation
through a Graduate Research Fellowship (DGE-
1256082) and NSF grants (IIS-1524371, 1637479,
165205, 1703166), the DARPA CwC program
through ARO (W911NF-15-1-0543), the IARPA
DIV A program through D17PC00343, the Sloan
Research Foundation through a Sloan Fellowship,
the Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, the
NVIDIA Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, and gifts by
Google and Facebook. The views and conclu-
sions contained herein are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing endorse-
ments of IARPA, DOI /IBC, or the U.S. Govern-
ment.
References
Yonatan Belinkov and Yonatan Bisk. 2018. Synthetic
and natural noise both break neural machine transla-
tion. In ICLR . ICLR.
Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhen-Hua Ling, Si Wei, Hui
Jiang, and Diana Inkpen. 2017. Enhanced lstm for
natural language inference. In Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , vol-
ume 1, pages 1657–1668.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .
Max Glockner, Vered Shwartz, and Yoav Goldberg.
2018. Breaking nli systems with sentences that re-
quire simple lexical inferences. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
pages 650–655.
Jonathan Gordon and Benjamin Van Durme. 2013. Re-
porting bias and knowledge acquisition. In Proceed-
9
ings of the 2013 workshop on Automated knowledge
base construction , pages 25–30. ACM.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer
Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel R. Bowman, and
Noah A. Smith. 2018. Annotation artifacts in nat-
ural language inference data. In Proc. of NAACL .
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin
Choi. 2019. The curious case of neural text degen-
eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751 .
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2017. Adversarial exam-
ples for evaluating reading comprehension systems.
InProceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2021–2031.
Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Bag of tricks for e cient text
classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 15th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers ,
volume 2, pages 427–431.
Ranjay Krishna, Kenji Hata, Frederic Ren, Li Fei-Fei,
and Juan Carlos Niebles. 2017. Dense-Captioning
Events in Videos. In International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV) .
Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word repre-
sentations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , volume 1,
pages 2227–2237.
Adam Poliak, Jason Naradowsky, Aparajita Haldar,
Rachel Rudinger, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018.
Hypothesis only baselines in natural language in-
ference. In Proceedings of the Seventh Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics ,
pages 180–191.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training. Technical re-
port, OpenAI.
Alec Radford, Je rey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. Techni-
cal report, OpenAI.
Anna Rohrbach, Atousa Torabi, Marcus Rohrbach,
Niket Tandon, Christopher Pal, Hugo Larochelle,
Aaron Courville, and Bernt Schiele. 2017. Movie
Description. International Journal of Computer Vi-
sion, 123(1):94–120.
Rachel Rudinger, Vera Demberg, Ashutosh Modi,
Benjamin Van Durme, and Manfred Pinkal. 2015.
Learning to predict script events from domain-
speciﬁc text. In Proceedings of the Fourth JointConference on Lexical and Computational Seman-
tics, pages 205–210.
Samuel Williams, Andrew Waterman, and David
Patterson. 2009. Rooﬂine: An insightful vi-
sual performance model for ﬂoating-point programs
and multicore architectures. Technical report,
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab.(LBNL), Berkeley,
CA (United States).
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Roy Schwartz, and Yejin
Choi. 2018. Swag: A large-scale adversarial dataset
for grounded commonsense inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard Zemel, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies:
Towards story-like visual explanations by watch-
ing movies and reading books. In arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.06724 .
10
Supplemental Material
A Adversarial Filtering Setup
In this subsection, we provide some more details
regarding the Adversarial Filtering experiments.
Our version of Adversarial Filtering is mostly
the same as Zellers et al. (2018). Details:
a. On each iteration, we split the dataset up into
80% training and 20% testing. We don’t do
anything special for this split (like looking at
the video /article IDs).
b. For ActivityNet, we use k9 assigned in-
dices for every example. (This corresponds to
the number of red columns in Figure 2). For
WikiHow, we used k5, since we found
that there were fewer good endings produced
by the generators after scaling up the sequence
length.
c. Similarly to Zellers et al. (2018), we train the
AF models in a multi-way fashion. Since
we use BERT-Large as the discriminator, this
matches Devlin et al. (2018)’s model for
SWAG: on each training example, the model
is given exactly one positive ending and sev-
eral negative endings, and the model com-
putes probability distribution over the endings
through a softmax. However, we also wanted
to always report 4-way probability for simplic-
ity. To do this, we train in a 4-way setting (the
training set is constructed by subsampling 3
wrong answers from the set of kthat are cur-
rently assigned to each example). The accu-
racy values that are reported are done so using
the ﬁrst 3 assigned negatives in dataset Dtest.
d. Sometimes, BERT never converges (accuracy
around 25%), so when this happens, we don’t
do the reassignment.
B GPT Setup
We generate our dataset examples from OpenAI
GPT. We ﬁnetune the model for two epochs on
WikiHow, and 5 epochs on ActivityNet, using the
default learning rate of (Radford et al., 2018). Im-
portantly, we generate randomly according to the
language model distribution, rather than perform-
ing beam search – this would bias the genera-
tions towards common words. For the WikiHow
endings, we used Nucleus Sampling with p
0:98, which means that the probability weights for
the tail (those tokens with cumulative probabil-
ity mass 0:02) are zeroed out (Holtzman et al.,2019).
C BERT setup
We extensively study BERT in this paper, and
make no changes to the underlying architecture or
pretraining. For all of the experiments where we
provide context, we set up the input to the BERT
model like this:
[CLS] A woman is outside with a bucket and
a dog. The dog is running around trying to
avoid a bath. [SEP] She gets the dog wet,
then it runs away again [SEP]
In the case where only the ending is pro-
vided, we adopt the BERT-style ‘single-span’ set-
ting: [CLS] She gets the dog wet, then it runs
away again [SEP]
D A discussion on BERT
Hyperparameters and Instability
It is worth noting that many of our experiments
some instability. On the SWAG experiments, we
use the same hyperparameters as (Devlin et al.,
2018) - these generally work very well.13How-
ever, we ﬁnd that they become a bit unstable when
crossing over to make HellaSwag . Here, we dis-
cuss some strategies and insight that we picked up
on.
a. We use a batch size of 64 examples rather
than 16, and warm the model up for 20% of
the dataset (rather than 10%). This helps the
model adapt to SWAG more gradually, with-
out diverging early on.
b. For the Adversarial Filtering experiments (for
both WikiHow and ActivityNet), we random-
ize some of the hyperaparmeters on each it-
eration. We sample a learning rate between
1e-5 and4e-5 , using a log-uniform distribu-
tion. These outer ranges were recommended
from the original BERT paper. Additionally,
with probability 0 :5 we use the cased model
(where the input isn’t originally lowercased
before tokenization), rather than the uncased
model.
c. During adversarial ﬁltering, we used 3 epochs.
However, we found that adding more epochs
13The only exception is for the plots where we vary the
number of training examples. In this case, we don’t want
to disadvantage the trials without much training data (since
this would allow for fewer parameter updates). To remedy
this, we continue training for 10 epochs and report the best
validation performance over the entire training history.
11
helped the model during ﬁne-tuning on the ﬁ-
nal dataset HellaSwag . Our best conﬁguration
uses 10 epochs.
d. While ﬁne-tuning on HellaSwag we used a
learning rate of 2e-5 .
E Human validation
We performed human validation using the same
setup as (Zellers et al., 2018). Humans get six an-
swers to choose from, of which exactly one is the
true ending and the other ﬁve are from AF. We
found that multiple rounds of human validation
were especially helpful on ActivityNet. However,
it helps to do the human validation in an intelli-
gent way: if the ﬁrst worker is confused, the an-
swer should be replaced before it goes to the next
worker. This is a hard problem, so we adopt the
following approach:
a. We use best practices on mechanical turk, pay-
ing workers fairly (up to 37 cents per HIT on
WikiHow). We also used a qualiﬁcation HIT
that was autograded to help ﬁlter for workers
who are good at the task. Workers who tended
to prefer the generated endings over the real
ones were dequaliﬁed from participating.
b. For each worker, we use the summary
of their performance so far to estimate
Ppanswer iis right|worker rates ias bestq. We
can then use this to estimate how conﬁdent we
are in each answer choice: we want to be con-
ﬁdent that workers will notprefer the wrong
answers. Also, this allows us to aggregate per-
formance across crowd workers, by multiply-
ing the probabilities for each answer choice.
c. On each round of ﬁltering, we keep the 3
wrong endings that workers least prefer (based
on the probability scores, along with the right
ending. The other two endings are new ones.
Particularly on ActivityNet, we found that there
are some contexts where the ground truth answer
isn’t liked by workers. To ﬁx this, we end up tak-
ing the best 25k examples from ActivityNet and
the best 45k from WikiHow. (By best, we mean
the ones with the highest probability that work-
ers will predict the true answer, versus the three
easiest-to-guess negatives, as judged by the Naive
Bayes model). We make Figure 7 (‘The road
toHellaSwag ’) by doing this process (taking the
best examples) for each dataset, while varying the
number of annotators that are used for getting the
scores for each ending. (In the case where thereare 0 annotators, we get a random sample).
F Human Evaluation
We do a human evaluation while giving workers
the exact same task as is given to the models.
Workers are given ﬁve endings, and must pick the
best one. We obtain human evaluation numbers by
combining 5 turkers together, with a majority vote.
We found that the biggest di erences in di -
culty in humans were due to domain (WikiHow is
easier than ActivityNet). To account for this, we
did the human evaluation over 200 examples from
WikiHow, and 200 examples from ActivityNet, for
each number of previous validators as shown in
Figure 7 (0, 1, or 2). To report the accuracy of a
split that’s mixed between WikiHow and Activity-
Net, we use the following formula:
acc WikiHowNWikiHow acc ActivityNetNActivityNet
NWikiHow NActivityNet
Here, accrefers to the accuracy on each dataset as
judged by humans, and Nis the number of exam-
ples from that dataset in the split.
G More examples
We additionally have more validation examples,
shown in Figure 2.
H In-Domain and Zero-Shot categories
See Figure 13 for a closer look at the dataset cate-
gories.
12
Category: Preparing pasta (activitynet; indomain)
A kitchen is shown followed by various ingredients
and a woman speaking to the camera. She begins
showing the ingredients and putting them into a hot
boiling pot and stirring around. she
a) shows o the oven and begins assembling the
cookies in the oven by pushing a button on the oven.
(2.2%)
b)continuesmixingupmore ingredients andthen
puts them alltogether inabowl, servingthedish
adsprin kling olive oilaround it.(97.8%)
c) shows raising and lowering the pot until adding
more water and corn syrup. (0.0%)
d) places an omelette onto the screen and puts it in
the oven to bake. (0.0%)Category : Doing crunches (activitynet; indomain)
We see a ﬁtness center sign. We then see a man talking
to the camera and sitting and laying on a exercise ball.
the man
a) demonstrates how to increase e cient exercise
work by running up and down balls. (0.0%)
b)moves allhisarms andlegsandbuilds upalotof
muscle.(80.9%)
c) then plays the ball and we see a graphics and
hedge trimming demonstration. (0.0%)
d)performs sitsupswhile ontheballandtalking.
(19.1%)
Category: Sharpening knives (activitynet; zeroshot)
A man is seen spinning a blade with his foot on a
machine and moving his hands up with down holding
a knife. the camera
a) pans around and shows a woman moving around
in a jump rope machine. (0.0%)
b)captures him from several angles while he
sharp enstheknife with complete concentration.
(81.6%)
c) pans around and points to a man standing inside
the machine as the man continues to move on the
machine. (18.4%)
d) then pans around to a woman and her daughter
who also dance at the show. (0.0%)Category: Layup drill in basketball (activitynet; zeroshot)
A female basketball coach is seen instructing a group
of girl basketball players who are standing in line on a
basketball court. the ﬁrst girl
a)passes toanother coach and then runs tothe
netandtakes alayup. (0.0%)
b)tryingtogettheballtogofarpast thebasketand
hititback towards thebasketwhile hercoach con-
tinuesteach ingher.(100.0%)
c) walks across the court with the ball and keeps
walking then pulling the girls to the other side of the
court and the girls begin playing volleyball rhyth-
mically rolling on the ﬂoor as the coach helps them
follow how to properly do things. (0.0%)
d) line up and stand behind a dummy dummy.
(0.0%)
Category: Youth (wikihow; indomain)
[header] How to make up a good excuse for your
homework not being ﬁnished [title] Blame technology.
[step] One of the easiest and most believable excuses
is simply blaming technology. You can say your
computer crashed, your printer broke, your internet
was down, or any number of problems.
a) Your excuses will hardly seem believable. [sub-
steps] This doesn’t mean you are lying, just only that
you don’t have all the details of how your computer
ran at the time of the accident. (0.0%)
b) The simplest one to have in a classroom is to
blame you entire classroom, not just lab. If you can
think of yourself as the victim, why not blame it on
technology. (9.4%)
c)Most people,your teacher included, have expe-
rienced setbacks due totechnologicalprob lems.
[substeps] This isagreat excuse ifyouhad apa-
peryouneeded totype andprint. (29.1%)
d)Itmay also bemore believable ifyou arefully
aware thatyoumay beﬂyingathigh speed onaplane
andneed some onetogive you trafﬁcreport. Your
problemmight beyour laptopfailingtocharge after
along ﬂight. (61.5%)Category: Family Life (wikihow; zeroshot)
[header] How to raise your children to be helpers
[title] Call them helpers when you ask for things.
[step] Instead of asking for help, ask your child to ”
be a helper. ” all people, children included, are more
motivated when their identity is in play.
a)You canstart doingthiswith your children as
early astwoyears old. [substeps] You might say,
”jayden, canyoubeahelper andclean your bed-
room before grandma comes over? ”or”please
beahelper andstay quiet while your sisternaps.
(0.1%)
b)When youcallyour child helpers, describe what
they doandwhat they need tobehelped for.[sub-
steps] Youcould say,”ineed youtohelp dadduring
hislunch break atwork. (99.9%)
c) If you ask your child for things they have access
to, it encourages them to put more e ort into making
things happen. [substeps] To make sure they under-
stand exactly what’s expected of them, you could try
saying, ” i’m looking for helpers who can be helpers.
(0.0%)
d) Call them when you need them for help or for
monetary help. [substeps] For example, if you need
help with something you don’t know how to do, let
your child know you’re excited to help with this.
(0.0%)
Table 2: Example questions answered by BERT-Large. Correct model predictions are in blue, incorrect model
predictions are red. The right answers are bolded .
13
Figure 13: Examples on the in-domain validation set of HellaSwag , grouped by category label. Our evaluation
setup equally weights performance on categories seen during training as well as out-of-domain.
14