Title: Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning

Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
Nitin Kamra1Umang Gupta1Yan Liu1
Abstract
Despite advances in deep learning, neural net-
works can only learn multiple tasks when trained
on them jointly. When tasks arrive sequentially,
they lose performance on previously learnt tasks.
This phenomenon called catastrophic forgetting
is a fundamental challenge to overcome before
neural networks can learn continually from in-
coming data. In this work, we derive inspiration
from human memory to develop an architecture
capable of learning continuously from sequen-
tially incoming tasks, while averting catastrophic
forgetting. Speciﬁcally, our contributions are: (i)
a dual memory architecture emulating the com-
plementary learning systems (hippocampus and
the neocortex) in the human brain, (ii) memory
consolidation via generative replay of past expe-
riences, (iii) demonstrating advantages of gener-
ative replay and dual memories via experiments,
and (iv) improved performance retention on chal-
lenging tasks even for low capacity models. Our
architecture displays many characteristics of the
mammalian memory and provides insights on the
connection between sleep and learning.
1. Introduction
Many machine learning models, when trained sequentially
on tasks, forget how to perform previously learnt tasks. This
phenomenon, called catastrophic forgetting is an impor-
tant challenge to overcome in order to enable systems to
learn continuously. In the early stages of investigation, Mc-
Closkey & Cohen (1989) suggested the underlying cause of
forgetting to be the distributed shared representation of tasks
via network weights. Subsequent works attempted to reduce
representational overlap between input representations via
activation sharpening algorithms (Kortge, 1990), orthogonal
recoding of inputs (Lewandowsky, 1991) and orthogonal
activations at all hidden layers (McRae & Hetherington,
1Department of Computer Science, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Nitin
Kamra <nkamra@usc.edu >.
Copyright 2018 by the author(s).1993; French, 1994). Recently, activations like maxout and
dropout (Goodfellow et al., 2013) and local winner-takes-
all (Srivastava et al., 2013) have been explored to create
sparsiﬁed feature representations. But, natural cognitive sys-
tems e.g. mammalian brains are also connectionist in nature
and yet they only undergo gradual systematic forgetting.
Frequently and recently encountered tasks tend to survive
much longer in memory, while those rarely encountered are
slowly forgotten. Hence shared representations may not
be the root cause of the problem. More recent approaches
have targeted slowing down learning on network weights
which are important for previously learnt tasks. Kirkpatrick
et al. (2017) have used a ﬁsher information matrix based
regularizer to slow down learning on network weights which
correlate with previously acquired knowledge. Zenke et al.
(2017) have employed path integrals of loss-derivatives to
slow down learning on weights important for the previous
tasks. Progressive neural networks (Rusu et al., 2016) and
Pathnets (Fernando et al., 2017) directly freeze important
pathways in neural networks, which eliminates forgetting
altogether but requires growing the network after each task
and can cause the architecture complexity to grow with the
number of tasks. Li & Hoiem (2017) have evaluated freez-
ing weights in earlier layers of a network and ﬁne tuning the
rest for multiple tasks. These methods outperform sparse
representations but may not be explicitly targeting the cause
of catastrophic forgetting.
An important assumption for successful gradient-based
learning is to observe iidsamples from the joint distribution
of all tasks to be learnt. Since sequential learning systems
violate this assumption, catastrophic forgetting is inevitable.
So a direct approach would be to store previously seen sam-
ples and replay them along with new samples in appropriate
proportions to restore the iidsampling assumption (Lopez-
Paz et al., 2017). This experience replay approach has been
adopted by maintaining a ﬁxed-size episodic memory of
exemplars which are either directly replayed while learn-
ing e.g. in iCaRL (Rebufﬁ et al., 2017) or indirectly used
to modify future gradient updates to the system e.g. in
GEM (Lopez-Paz et al., 2017) to mitigate forgetting on
previously seen tasks. However, choosing to store sam-
ples from previous tasks is challenging since it requires
determining how many samples need to be stored, which
samples are most representative of a task, and which sam-arXiv:1710.10368v2  [cs.LG]  25 May 2018
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
ples to discard as new tasks arrive (Lucic et al., 2017). We
propose that this problem can be solved by maintaining a
generative model over samples which would automatically
provide the most frequently encountered samples from the
distribution learnt so far. This is also feasible with limited
total memory and avoids explicitly determining which and
how many samples should be stored and/or discarded per
task. Previous non-generative approaches to experience
replay e.g. pseudo-pattern rehearsal (Robins, 2004) have
proposed to preserve neural networks’ learnt mappings by
uniformly sampling random inputs and their corresponding
outputs from networks and replaying them along with new
task samples. These approaches have only been tested in
small binary input spaces and our experiments show that
sampling random inputs in high-dimensional spaces (e.g.
images) does not preserve the learnt mappings.
Neuroscientiﬁc evidence suggests that experience replay of
patterns has also been observed in the human brain during
sleep and waking rest (McClelland et al., 1995; ONeill et al.,
2010). Further, humans have evolved mechanisms to sepa-
rately learn new incoming tasks and consolidate them with
previous knowledge to avert catastrophic forgetting (McClel-
land et al., 1995; French, 1999). The widely acknowledged
complementary learning systems theory (McClelland et al.,
1995; Kumaran et al., 2016) suggests that this separation has
been achieved in the human brain via evolution of two sepa-
rate areas: (a) the neocortex, which is a long term memory
specializing in consolidating new information with previous
knowledge to gradually learn the joint structure of all tasks,
and (b) the hippocampus, which acts as a temporary mem-
ory to rapidly learn new tasks and then slowly transfers the
knowledge to neocortex after acquisition.
In this paper, we propose a dual-memory architecture for
learning tasks sequentially while averting catastrophic for-
getting. Our model comprises of two generative models: a
short-term memory (STM) to emulate the human hippocam-
pal system and a long term memory (LTM) to emulate the
neocortical learning system. The STM learns new tasks
without interfering with previously learnt tasks in the LTM.
The LTM stores all previously learnt tasks and aids the STM
in learning tasks similar to previously seen tasks. During
sleep/down-time, the STM generates and transfers samples
of learnt tasks to the LTM. These are gradually consolidated
with the LTM’s knowledge base of previous tasks via gen-
erative replay. Our model exploits the strengths of deep
generative models, experience replay and complementary
learning systems literature. We demonstrate its performance
experimentally in averting catastrophic forgetting by sequen-
tially learning multiple tasks. Moreover, our experiments
shed light on some characteristics of human memory as
observed in the psychology and neuroscience literature.2. Problem Description
Formally, our problem setting is characterized by a set of
tasksT, to be learnt by a parameterized model. Note that we
use the the phrase model andneural network architecture
interchangeably. In this work, we mainly consider super-
vised learning tasks i.e. task t2Thas training samples:
fXt;Ytg=fxt
i;yt
igi=1:Ntforxt
i2X andyt
i2Y, but our
model easily generalizes to unsupervised learning settings.
Samples for each task are drawn iidfrom an (unknown)
data generating distribution Ptassociated with the task i.e.
fxt
i;yt
igPt8i2[Nt], but the distributions fPtgt2Tcan
be completely different from each other. The tasks arrive
sequentially and the total number of tasks T=jTjis not
known a priori. Note that the full sequence of samples seen
by the architecture is not sampled iidfrom the joint distri-
bution of all samples. The architecture observes the task
descriptor and the data ft;Xt;Ytgfor each task while train-
ing sequentially. It can be evaluated at any time on a test
sampleft;xtgto predict its label ytwherefxt;ytgPt
after taskthas been observed. Our goal is to learn these
tasks sequentially while avoiding catastrophic forgetting
and achieve a test accuracy close to that of a model which
was jointly trained on all tasks.
Finite memory : We allow a limited storage for algorithms
to store or generate samples while learning.The storage size
is limited to Nmax and usually smaller than the total num-
ber of samplesPT
t=1Nt. Hence, just storing all training
samples and reusing them is infeasible.
Evaluation metrics : After training on each task, we evalu-
ate models on separate test sets for each task. This gives us a
matrixA2RTTwithAi;jbeing the test accuracy on task
jafter training on task i. Following (Lopez-Paz et al., 2017),
we evaluate algorithms on the following metrics — Average
accuracy (ACC) achieved across all tasks and Backward
Transfer (BWT):
ACC =1
TTX
i=1AT;iBWT =1
T 1T 1X
i=1AT;i Ai;i
Backward transfer (BWT) measures the inﬂuence of task t
on a previously learnt task . This is generally negative since
learning new tasks sequentially causes the model to lose
performance on previous tasks. A large negative backward
BWT represents catastrophic forgetting. An ideal continual
learning algorithm should achieve maximum ACC while
having least negative (or positive) BWT.
3. Deep Generative Dual Memory Network
3.1. Deep Generative Replay
We present a generative experience replay algorithm to learn
from sequentially arriving samples. We ﬁrst introduce a
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
Figure 1: Deep Generative Replay to train a Deep Generative Memory
sub-model called the Deep Generative Memory (DGM)1
with three elements: (i) a generative model (the generator
G), (ii) a feedforward network (the learner L), and (iii) a
dictionary (Ddgm) with task descriptors of learnt tasks and
the number of times they were encountered. Though most
previous works (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Lopez-Paz et al.,
2017; Zenke et al., 2017) and our algorithm involve usage
of task descriptors tin some form, our architecture also
works when they are either unavailable, non-integral or just
an inseparable part of the input xt(see Appendix A). We
choose variational autoencoder (V AE) (Kingma & Welling,
2014) for the generator, since our generative model requires
reconstruction capabilities (see section 3.2) but can also
work with other kinds of generative models (see section 5).
We update a DGM with samples from (potentially multi-
ple) new tasks using our algorithm Deep Generative Replay
(DGR). The pseudocode is shown in algorithm 1 and vi-
sualized in ﬁgure 1. DGR essentially combines the new
incoming samples (X;Y )with its own generated samples
from previous tasks and relearns jointly on these samples.
Given new incoming samples (X;Y ), DGR computes the
fraction of samples to use from incoming samples (tasks)
and the fraction to preserve from previous tasks (gen)ac-
cording to the number of samples seen so far (i.e. ageof
DGM). If needed, the incoming samples are downsampled
while still allocating at least a minimum fraction of the
memory to them (lines 3–16). This ensures that as the DGM
saturates with tasks over time, new tasks are still learnt at
the cost of gradually losing performance on the least re-
cent previous tasks. This is synonymous to how learning
slows down in humans as they age but they still continue to
learn while forgetting old things gradually (French, 1999).
Next, DGR generates samples of previously learnt tasks
(Xgen;Ygen)using the generator and learner, transfers the
1We call this a memory because of its weights and learning
capacity, not due to any recurrent connections.task descriptors of samples in (X;Y )to its own dictionary
Ddgmand updates its age (lines 17–21). It then trains the
Algorithm 1 Deep Generative Replay
1:Input: Current params and ageof DGM, new samples:
(X;Y ), dictionary for new samples: Dtasks , minimum
fraction:, memory capacity: Nmax
2:Output: New parameters of DGM
fCompute number of samples g
3:Ntasks =jXj
4:Ngen=age
5:ifjXj+age>Nmax then
6:tasks = max
;jXj
jXj+age
7:Ntasks =tasksNmax
8:Ngen=Nmax Ntasks
9:end if
10:Ntotal=Ntasks +Ngen
fSubsampleX;Y if neededg
11:ifNtasks<jXjthen
12:Xtasks;Ytasks =DrawNtasks samples from X;Y
13:else
14:Ntasks;Ngen=jXj;Ntotal jXj
15:Xtasks;Ytasks =X;Y
16:end if
fGenerate samples from previous tasks g
17:Xgen=DrawNgensamples from G
18:Ygen=L(Xgen)
19:Xtr;Ytr=concat (Xtasks;Xgen);concat (Ytasks;Ygen)
20:Add task descriptors from Dtasks toDdgm
21:age=age+Ntotal
fTrain DGMg
22:Train generator GonXtr
23:Xrecon =Reconstruct Xtasks from generator G
24:Xtr=concat (Xrecon;Xgen)
25:Train learner Lon(Xtr;Ytr)
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
generator on the total training samples Xtr, reconstructs the
new samples via the trained generator as Xrecon (hence we
use a V AE) and then trains the learner on resulting samples
Xtr=concat (Xrecon;Xgen)and their labels Ytr(lines 22–
25). Doing this ﬁnal reconstruction provides robustness to
noise and occlusion (section 5).
Ideas similar to DGR have recently been proposed by Mo-
canu et al. (2016) and Shin et al. (2017) independently,
but they do not describe balancing new and generated sam-
ples and cannot recognize repeated tasks (section 7.1 in
appendix A). Also generative replay without a dual memory
architecture is costly to train (section 4.2) and a lack of
reconstruction for new samples makes their representations
less robust to noise and occlusions (section 5).
3.2. Dual memory networks
Though DGR is a continual learning algorithm on its own,
our preliminary experiments showed that it is slow and in-
accurate. To balance the conﬂicting requirements of quick
acquisition of new tasks and performance retention on pre-
viously learnt tasks, we propose a dual memory network to
combat forgetting. Our architecture (DGDMN) shown in ﬁg-
ure 2 comprises of a large DGM called the long-term mem-
ory (LTM) which stores information of all previously learnt
tasks like the neocortex and a short-term memory (STM)
which behaves similar to the hippocampus and learns new
incoming tasks quickly without interference from previous
tasks. The STM is a collection of nSTM small, dedicated
deep generative memories (called short-term task memory –
STTM), which can each learn one unique task.
While training on an incoming task, if it is already in an
STTM, the same STTM is retrained on it, otherwise a fresh
STTM is allocated to the task. Additionally, if the task
has been previously seen and consolidated into the LTM,
then the LTM reconstructs the incoming samples for that
task using the generator (hence we use a V AE), predicts
labels for the reconstructions using its learner and sends
these newly generated samples to the STTM allocated to
this task. This provides extra samples on tasks which have
been learnt previously and helps to learn them better, while
also preserving the previous performance on that task to
some extent. Once all (nSTM)STTMs are exhausted, the
architecture sleeps (like humans) to consolidate all tasks into
the LTM and free up the STTMs for new tasks. While asleep,
the STM generates and sends samples of learnt tasks to
the LTM, where these are consolidated via deep generative
replay (see ﬁgure 2).
While testing on task t(even intermittently between tasks),
if any STTM currently contains task t, it is used to predict
the labels, else the prediction is deferred to the LTM. This
allows predicting on all tasks seen uptil now (including the
most recent ones) without sleeping. Finally note that DGRkeeps track of task descriptors in dictionaries but does not
use them for learning. DGDMN only uses task descriptors
to recognize whether a task has been previously observed
and/or the memory in which a task currently resides. This
can be relaxed by using the reconstruction error from gen-
erators as a proxy for recognition (see appendix A). Hence
DGDMN still works in the absence of task descriptors.
4. Experiments
We perform experiments to demonstrate forgetting on se-
quential image classiﬁcation tasks. We brieﬂy describe
our datasets here (details in appendix B): (a) Permnist is a
catastrophic forgetting benchmark (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017)
and each task contains a ﬁxed permutation of pixels on
MNIST images, (b) Digits dataset involves classifying a
single MNIST digit per task, (c) TDigits is a transformed
variant of MNIST similar to Digits but with 40tasks for
long task sequences, (d) Shapes contains several geometric
shape classiﬁcation tasks, and (e) Hindi contains a sequence
of8tasks with hindi language consonant recognition.
We compare DGDMN with several baselines for catas-
trophic forgetting, while choosing at least one from each
category: representational overlap, learning slowdown and
experience replay. These are brieﬂy described here (im-
plementation and hyperparameter details in appendix B):
(a)Feedforward neural networks (NN) : To characterize
forgetting in the absence of any prevention mechanism and
as a reference for other approaches, (b) Neural nets with
dropout (DropNN) : Goodfellow et al. (2013) suggested us-
ing dropout as a means to prevent representational overlaps
and pacify catastrophic forgetting, (c) Pseudopattern Re-
hearsal (PPR) : A non-generative approach to experience
replay (Robins, 2004), (d) Elastic Weight Consolidation
(EWC) : Kirkpatrick et al. (2017) proposed using the Fisher
Information Matrix for task-speciﬁc learning slowdown of
weights in a neural network, and (e) Deep Generative Re-
play (DGR) : We train only the LTM from DGDMN to sep-
arate the effects of deep generative replay and dual memory
architecture. This is partly similar to Shin et al. (2017).
In our preliminary experiments, we observed that large over-
parameterized networks can more easily adapt to sequen-
tially incoming tasks, thereby partly mitigating catastrophic
forgetting. So we have chosen network architectures which
have to share all their parameters appropriately amongst the
various tasks in a dataset to achieve reasonable joint accu-
racy. This allows us to evaluate algorithms carefully while
ignoring the beneﬁts provided by overparameterization.
4.1. Accuracy and Forgetting curves
We trained DGDMN and all baselines sequentially on the
image classiﬁcation tasks of Permnist, Digits, Shapes and
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
Figure 2: Deep Generative Dual Memory Network (DGDMN)
Hindi datasets (separately). Due to space constraints, we
show results on the Shapes and Hindi datasets in appendix
A. The classiﬁcation accuracy on a held out test set for each
task, after training on the tthtask has been shown in ﬁgures
3 and 4. We used the same network architecture for NN,
PPR, EWC, learner in DGR, and learner in the LTM of
DGDMN for a given dataset. DropNN had intermediate
dropouts after hidden layers (details in appendix B).
We observe from ﬁgures 3 and 4, that NN and DropNN
forget catastrophically while learning and perform similarly.
We veriﬁed the same on other datasets in Appendix A. EWC
performs better than NN and DropNN, but rapidly slows
down learning on many weights and effectively stagnates
after Task 3 (e.g. see Tasks 5 and 6 in ﬁgure 3d). The
learning slowdown on weights hinders EWC from reusing
those weights later to jointly discover common structures
between tasks. Note that the networks do have the capacity
to learn all tasks and our generative replay based algorithms
DGR and DGDMN indeed learn all tasks sequentially with
the same learner networks.
Further, we observed heavy forgetting on Digits (ﬁgure 4)
for most baselines, which is expected because all samples
in thetthtask have a single label ( t) and thetthtask can
be learnt on its own by setting the tthbias of the ﬁnal
softmax layer to be high and the other biases to be low. Such
sequential tasks cause networks to forget catastrophically.
We observed that NN, DropNN, PPR and EWC learnt only
the task being trained on and forgot all previous knowledge
immediately. Sometimes, we also observed saturation due to
the softmax bias being set very high and then being unable
to recover from it. PPR showed severe saturation since its
replay prevented it from coming out of the saturation.
DGR and DGDMN still retain performance on all tasks of
Digits, since they replay generated samples from previous
tasks. The average forgetting on all tasks 2f1;:::;tg, af-ter training on the tthtask (for both Digits and Permnist)
is shown in ﬁgure 5. For absolute reference, the accuracy
of NN by training it jointly on all tasks uptil the tthtask
has also been shown for each t. This also shows that DGR
and DGDMN consistently outperform baselines in terms of
retained average accuracy. In ﬁgure 5b, NN, DropNN, PPR
and EWC follow nearly overlapping curves ( acc1
t) since
they are only able to learn one task at a time. Though PPR
also involves experience replay, it is not able to preserve
its learnt mapping by randomly sampling points from its
domain and hence forgets catastrophically. These observa-
tions substantiate our claim that a replay mechanism must
be generative and model the input distribution accurately.
We observed similar results on other datasets (appendix A).
Table 1: Average accuracies for all algorithms.
ALGORITHM DIGITS PERMNIST SHAPES HINDI
NN 0.1 0.588 0.167 0.125
DROPNN 0.1 0.59 0.167 0.125
PPR 0.1 0.574 0.167 0.134
EWC 0.1 0.758 0.167 0.125
DGR 0.596 0.861 0.661 0.731
DGDMN 0.818 0.831 0.722 0.658
Table 2: Backward transfer for all algorithms.
ALGORITHM DIGITS PERMNIST SHAPES HINDI
NN -0.778 -0.434 -0.4 -1.0
DROPNN -1.0 -0.43 -0.8 -1.0
PPR -0.444 -0.452 -0.2 -0.989
EWC -1.0 -0.05 -1.0 -1.0
DGR -0.425 -0.068 -0.288 -0.270
DGDMN -0.15 -0.075 -0.261 -0.335
We show the ﬁnal average accuracies (ACC) and backward
transfer (BWT) between tasks in tables 1 and 2 respectively.
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
(a) NN
 (b) DropNN
 (c) PPR
(d) EWC
 (e) DGR
 (f) DGDMN
Figure 3: Accuracy curves for Permnist (x: tasks seen, y: classiﬁcation accuracy on task).
NN, DropNN, PPR and EWC get near random accuracies on
all datasets except Permnist due to catastrophic forgetting.
DGDMN and DGR perform similarly and outperform other
baselines on ACC while having the least negative BWT.
Since backward transfer is a direct measure of forgetting,
this also shows that we effectively mitigate catastrophic
forgetting and avoid inter-task interference. We point out
that datasets like Digits should be considered important
benchmarks for continual learning since they have low cor-
relation between samples of different tasks and promote
overﬁtting to the new incoming task thereby causing catas-
trophic forgetting. Being able to retain performance on such
task sequences is a strong indicator of the effectiveness of a
continual learning algorithm.
4.2. Connections to complementary learning systems
and sleep
To differentiate between DGDMN and DGR, we trained
both of them on a long sequence of 40tasks from TDigits
dataset. We limited Nmax to120;000samples for this task
to explore the case where the LTM in DGDMN (DGM in
DGR) cannot regenerate many samples and has to forget
some tasks. At least = 0:05fraction of memory was
ensured for new task samples and consolidation in DGDMN
happened after nSTM = 5tasks.
The average forgetting curves are plotted in ﬁgure 6a
and show that forgetting is gradual and not catastrophic.
DGDMN retains more accuracy on all tasks as compared
to DGR and is faster to train as shown by ﬁgure 6c. This isbecause DGR consolidates its DGM after every task. Since
LTM is a large memory and requires more samples to con-
solidate, it trains slower. Further, the DGM’s self-generated
slightly erroneous samples compound errors quite fast. On
the other hand, DGDMN uses small STTMs to learn single
tasks faster and with low error. Consequently, the LTM con-
solidates less often and sees more accurate samples, hence
its error accumulates much slower. Lastly, DGDMN stays
around 90% average accuracy on the most recently observed
10tasks (ﬁgure 6b), whereas DGR propagates errors too
fast and also fails on this metric eventually.
Dual memory architecture and periodic sleep has emerged
naturally in humans as a scalable design choice. Though
sleeping is a dangerous behavior for any organism due to
risk of being attacked by a predator, it has still survived eons
of evolution (Joiner, 2016) and most organisms with even a
slightly developed nervous system (centralized or diffuse)
still exhibit either sleep or light-resting behavior (Nath et al.,
2017). This experiment partly sheds light on the importance
of dual memory architecture intertwined with periodic sleep,
without which learning would be highly time consuming
and short lived (as in DGR).
5. Analysis and discussion
We next show that DGDMN shares some remarkable char-
acteristics with the human memory and present a discussion
of some relevant ideas. Due to space constraints, we have
deferred some visualizations of the learnt latent structures
to appendix A. The hyperparameters of DGDMN ( and
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
(a) NN
 (b) DropNN
 (c) PPR
(d) EWC
 (e) DGR
 (f) DGDMN
Figure 4: Accuracy curves for Digits (x: tasks seen, y: classiﬁcation accuracy on task).
(a) Permnist
 (b) Digits
Figure 5: Forgetting curves (x: tasks seen, y: avg classiﬁcation accuracy on tasks seen).
nSTM ) admit intuitive interpretations and can be tuned with
simple heuristics (see appendix B).
Resilience to noise and occlusion : We have used a V AE
to be able to reconstruct all samples, which helps to recog-
nize task examples (appendix A) and also makes our model
resilient to noise, distortion and occlusion. We tested our
LTM model and a NN model by jointly training on uncor-
rupted Digits data and testing on noisy and occluded images.
Figure 7 shows that the LTM is more robust to noise and
occlusion due to its denoising reconstructive properties.
The choice of underlying generative model : Our architec-
ture is agnostic to the choice of the underlying generative
model as long as the generator can generate reliable sam-
ples and reconstruct incoming samples accurately. Hence,apart from V AEs, variants of Generative Adversarial Net-
works like BiGANs (Donahue et al., 2017), ALI (Dumoulin
et al., 2017) and A VB (Mescheder et al., 2017) can be used
depending on the modeled domain.
Connections to knowledge distillation : Previous works
on (joint) multitask learning have also proposed approaches
to learn individual tasks with small networks and then “dis-
tilling” them jointly into a larger network (Rusu et al., 2015).
Such distillation can sometimes improve performance on
individual tasks if they share structure and at other times
mitigate inter-task interference due to reﬁnement of learnt
functions while distilling (Parisotto et al., 2016). Similarly,
due to reﬁnement and compression during consolidation
phase, DGDMN is also able to learn joint task structure
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 6: Accuracy and training time for DGDMN and DGR on TDigits: (a) Accuracy on tasks seen so far, (b) Accuracy on
last 10 tasks seen, (c) Training time
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 7: LTM is robust to noisy and occluded images and exhibits smoother degradation in classiﬁcation accuracy because
of its denoising reconstructive properties: (a) LTM reconstruction from noisy and occluded digits, (b) Classiﬁcation accuracy
with increasing gaussian noise, and (c) Classiﬁcation accuracy with increasing occlusion factor.
effectively while mitigating interference between tasks.
Learning from streaming data : We have presently for-
mulated our setup with task descriptors to compare it with
existing approaches in the continual learning literature, but
we emphasize that having no dependence on task descrip-
tors is an essential step to learn continually from streaming
data. Our approach allows online recognition of task sam-
ples via a reconstructive generative model and is applicable
in domains with directly streaming data without any task
descriptors unlike most previous approaches which make
explicit use of task descriptors (Zenke et al., 2017; Kirk-
patrick et al., 2017; Rebufﬁ et al., 2017; Lopez-Paz et al.,
2017) (see appendix A). This would allow DGDMN to be
used for learning policies over many tasks via reinforcement
learning without explicit replay memories, and we plan to
explore this in future work.
Approaches based on synaptic consolidation : Though
our architecture draws inspiration from complementary
learning systems and experience replay in the human brain,
there is also neuroscientiﬁc evidence for synaptic consolida-tion in the human brain like in (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) and
(Zenke et al., 2017). It might be interesting to explore how
synaptic consolidation can be incorporated in our dual mem-
ory architecture without causing stagnation and we leave
this to future work.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we have developed a continual learning archi-
tecture to avert catastrophic forgetting. Our dual memory
architecture emulates the complementary learning systems
in the human brain and maintains a consolidated long-term
memory via generative replay of past experiences. We have
shown that generative replay performs the best for long-
term performance retention and scales well along with a
dual memory architecture via our experiments. Moreover,
our architecture displays signiﬁcant parallels with the hu-
man memory system and provides useful insights about the
connection between sleep and learning in humans.
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
References
Cepeda, Nicholas J, Pashler, Harold, Vul, Edward, Wixted,
John T, and Rohrer, Doug. Distributed practice in verbal
recall tasks: A review and quantitative synthesis. Psycho-
logical bulletin , 132(3):354, 2006.
Donahue, Jeff, Kr ¨ahenb ¨uhl, Philipp, and Darrell, Trevor.
Adversarial feature learning. In International Conference
on Learning Representations , 2017.
Dumoulin, Vincent, Belghazi, Ishmael, Poole, Ben, Lamb,
Alex, Arjovsky, Martin, Mastropietro, Olivier, and
Courville, Aaron. Adversarially learned inference. In
International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2017.
Fernando, Chrisantha, Banarse, Dylan, Blundell, Charles,
Zwols, Yori, Ha, David, Rusu, Andrei A, Pritzel, Alexan-
der, and Wierstra, Daan. Pathnet: Evolution channels
gradient descent in super neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.08734 , 2017.
French, Robert M. Dynamically constraining connectionist
networks to produce distributed, orthogonal representa-
tions to reduce catastrophic interference. network , 1994.
French, Robert M. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist
networks. Trends in cognitive sciences , 3(4):128–135,
1999.
Goodfellow, Ian J, Mirza, Mehdi, Xiao, Da, Courville,
Aaron, and Bengio, Yoshua. An empirical investiga-
tion of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6211 , 2013.
Google. The quick, draw! dataset. URL:
https://github.com/googlecreativelab/quickdraw-dataset,
2017.
Hinton, Geoffrey. Neural networks for machine learning
- lecture 6a - overview of mini-batch gradient descent,
2012.
Joiner, William J. Unraveling the evolutionary determinants
of sleep. Current Biology , 26(20):R1073–R1087, 2016.
Kaggle. Devanagari character set. URL:
https://www.kaggle.com/rishianand/devanagari-
character-set, 2017.
Kahana, Michael J and Howard, Marc W. Spacing and lag
effects in free recall of pure lists. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review , 12(1):159–164, 2005.
Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational
bayes. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations , 2014.Kirkpatrick, James, Pascanu, Razvan, Rabinowitz, Neil,
Veness, Joel, Desjardins, Guillaume, Rusu, Andrei A,
Milan, Kieran, Quan, John, Ramalho, Tiago, Grabska-
Barwinska, Agnieszka, et al. Overcoming catastrophic
forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences , 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Kortge, Chris A. Episodic memory in connectionist net-
works. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society , volume 764, pp. 771.
Erlbaum, 1990.
Kumaran, Dharshan, Hassabis, Demis, and McClelland,
James L. What learning systems do intelligent agents
need? complementary learning systems theory updated.
Trends in cognitive sciences , 20(7):512–534, 2016.
Lewandowsky, Stephan. Gradual unlearning and catas-
trophic interference: A comparison of distributed archi-
tectures. Relating theory and data: Essays on human
memory in honor of Bennet B. Murdock , pp. 445–476,
1991.
Li, Zhizhong and Hoiem, Derek. Learning without forget-
ting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence , 2017.
Lopez-Paz, David et al. Gradient episodic memory for
continual learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 6470–6479, 2017.
Lucic, Mario, Faulkner, Matthew, Krause, Andreas, and
Feldman, Dan. Training mixture models at scale via
coresets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.08110 , 2017.
Maaten, Laurens van der and Hinton, Geoffrey. Visualizing
data using t-sne. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
9(Nov):2579–2605, 2008.
McClelland, James L, McNaughton, Bruce L, and O’reilly,
Randall C. Why there are complementary learning sys-
tems in the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the
successes and failures of connectionist models of learning
and memory. Psychological review , 102(3):419, 1995.
McCloskey, Michael and Cohen, Neal J. Catastrophic inter-
ference in connectionist networks: The sequential learn-
ing problem. Psychology of learning and motivation , 24:
109–165, 1989.
McRae, Ken and Hetherington, Phil A. Catastrophic interfer-
ence is eliminated in pretrained networks. In Proceedings
of the 15h Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society , pp. 723–728, 1993.
Mescheder, Lars, Nowozin, Sebastian, and Geiger, Andreas.
Adversarial variational bayes: Unifying variational au-
toencoders and generative adversarial networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.04722 , 2017.
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
Mocanu, Decebal Constantin, Vega, Maria Torres, Eaton,
Eric, Stone, Peter, and Liotta, Antonio. Online contrastive
divergence with generative replay: Experience replay
without storing data. CoRR , abs/1610.05555, 2016.
Nath, Ravi D, Bedbrook, Claire N, Abrams, Michael J,
Basinger, Ty, Bois, Justin S, Prober, David A, Sternberg,
Paul W, Gradinaru, Viviana, and Goentoro, Lea. The
jellyﬁsh cassiopea exhibits a sleep-like state. Current
Biology , 27(19):2984–2990, 2017.
ONeill, Joseph, Pleydell-Bouverie, Barty, Dupret, David,
and Csicsvari, Jozsef. Play it again: reactivation of wak-
ing experience and memory. Trends in Neurosciences , 33
(5):220–229, 2010.
Parisotto, Emilio, Ba, Jimmy Lei, and Salakhutdinov, Rus-
lan. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and transfer reinforce-
ment learning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2016.
Rebufﬁ, Sylvestre-Alvise, Kolesnikov, Alexander, and Lam-
pert, Christoph H. icarl: Incremental classiﬁer and rep-
resentation learning. In IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2017.
Robins, Anthony. Sequential learning in neural networks: A
review and a discussion of pseudorehearsal based meth-
ods. Intelligent Data Analysis , 8(3):301–322, 2004.
Rusu, Andrei A, Colmenarejo, Sergio Gomez, Gulcehre,
Caglar, Desjardins, Guillaume, Kirkpatrick, James, Pas-
canu, Razvan, Mnih, V olodymyr, Kavukcuoglu, Koray,
and Hadsell, Raia. Policy distillation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06295 , 2015.
Rusu, Andrei A, Rabinowitz, Neil C, Desjardins, Guillaume,
Soyer, Hubert, Kirkpatrick, James, Kavukcuoglu, Koray,
Pascanu, Razvan, and Hadsell, Raia. Progressive neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04671 , 2016.
Shin, Hanul, Lee, Jung Kwon, Kim, Jaehong, and Kim,
Jiwon. Continual learning with deep generative replay.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pp. 2994–3003, 2017.
Srivastava, Rupesh K, Masci, Jonathan, Kazerounian,
Sohrob, Gomez, Faustino, and Schmidhuber, J ¨urgen.
Compete to compute. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 2310–2318, 2013.
Zenke, Friedemann, Poole, Ben, and Ganguli, Surya. Con-
tinual learning through synaptic intelligence. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 3987–3995,
2017.
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
7. Appendix A
7.1. Repeated tasks and revision
It is well known in psychology literature that human learn-
ing improves via revision (Kahana & Howard, 2005; Cepeda
et al., 2006). We show performance of EWC and DGDMN
on Permnist, when some tasks are repeated (ﬁgure 8). DGR
performs very similar to DGDMN, hence we omit it. EWC
stagnates and once learning has slowed down on the weights
important for Task 1, the weights cannot be changed again,
not even for improving Task 1. Further, it did not learn Task
6 the ﬁrst time and revision does not help either. However,
DGDMN learns all tasks uptil Task 6 and then improves
by revising Task 1 and 6 again. We point out that methods
involving freezing (or slowdown) of learning often do not
learn well via revision since they do not have any means
of identifying tasks and unfreezing the previously frozen
weights when the task is re-encountered. While many pre-
vious works do not investigate revision, it is crucial for
learning continuously and should improve performance on
tasks. The ability to learn from correlated task samples and
revision makes our architecture functionally similar to that
of humans.
7.2. Experiments on other datasets
In this section, we present more experiments on the Shapes
and the Hindi dataset, which contain sequences of tasks
with geometric shapes and hindi consonants recognition
respectively. We observed similar forgetting patterns as on
the Digits dataset in section 4. All baselines exhibited catas-
trophic forgetting on these sequences of tasks, but DGR
and DGDMN were able to learn the task structure sequen-
tially (ﬁgures 9, 10). The same is reﬂected in the average
forgetting curves in ﬁgure 11.
7.3. Jointly vs. sequentially learnt structure
To explore whether learning tasks sequentially results in
a similar structure as learning them jointly, we visualized
t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008) embeddings of the latent
vectors of the LTM generator (V AE) in DGDMN after train-
ing it: (a) jointly over all tasks (Figure 12a), and (b) sequen-
tially over tasks seen one at a time (Figure 12b) on the Digits
dataset. To maintain consistency, we used the same random
seed in t-SNE for both joint and sequential embeddings.
We observe that the LTM’s latent space effectively seg-
regates the 10 digits in both cases (joint and sequential).
Though the absolute locations of the digit clusters differ in
the two plots, the relative locations of digits share some sim-
ilarity between both plots i.e. the neighboring digit clusters
for each cluster are roughly similar. This may not be suf-
ﬁcient to conclude that the LTM discovers the same latent
representation for the underlying shared structure of tasksin these cases and we leave a more thorough investigation
to future work.
7.4. Visualizations for the jointly and sequentially
learnt LTM
We also show visualizations of digits from the LTM when
trained jointly on Digits tasks (Figure 13a) and when trained
sequentially (Figure 13b). Though the digits generated from
the jointly trained LTM are quite sharp, the same is not
true for the sequentially trained LTM. We observe that the
sequentially trained LTM produces sharp samples of the re-
cently learnt tasks (digits 6;7;8and9), but blurred samples
of previously learnt tasks, which is due to partial forgetting
on these previous tasks.
7.5. DGDMN with no task descriptors
As described in section 3.2, DGDMN only uses task descrip-
tors to recognize if a task already exists in an STTM or the
LTM so that it can be appropriately allocated to the correct
memory. Note that in our architecture this can also be done
by using the reconstruction error of the generator on the
task samples as a proxy for recognition. Speciﬁcally, in this
variant DGDMN recog, tasks arrive sequentially but only
(Xt;Yt)is observed while training and only Xtwhile test-
ing. A DGM, when tested to recognize task tfrom samples
Xt, reconstructs all samples Xtusing the generator Gand
checks if the recognition loss is less than a certain threshold:
recogloss(Xt) =NtX
i=1recons loss(xi
t)
intensity (xi
t)<dgm;
where recons loss() is the reconstruction loss on a sample,
intensity() describes the strength of the input sample (for
images, the sum of pixel intensities) and dgmis a scalar
threshold and a hyperparameter which can be tuned sep-
arately for the LTM and the STM (same for all STTMs).
We keptdgm= 1:55for both the LTM and all STTMs.
In this case the training of the generators also employs a
new termination criteria i.e. the generator of a DGM is
trained till recog loss() is belowdgm. The rest of the algo-
rithm remains unchanged. We show the accuracy curves and
the average forgetting curves for this variant on the Digits
dataset in ﬁgures 14a and 14b respectively. We observe very
little degradation from the original DGDMN which uses
task descriptors for recognition. DGDMN recog achieved
ACC = 0:766andBWT = 0:197across all tasks which
is similar to that of DGDMN.
8. Appendix B
8.1. Dataset preprocessing
All our datasets have images with intensities normalized in
the range [0:0;1:0]and size (2828), except Hindi which
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
(a)
 (b)
Figure 8: Accuracy curves when tasks are revised: (a) EWC, (b) GEM, and (c) DGDMN.
(a) CNN
 (b) DropCNN
 (c) PPR
(d) EWC
 (e) DGR
 (f) DGDMN
Figure 9: Accuracy curves for Shapes (x: tasks seen, y: classiﬁcation accuracy on task).
has(3232)size images.
Permnist : Our version involved six tasks, each containing
a ﬁxed permutation on images sampled from the original
MNIST dataset. We sampled 30;000images from the train-
ing set and all the 10;000test set images for each task. The
tasks were as follows: (i) Original MNIST, (ii) 8x8 central
patch of each image blackened, (iii) 8x8 central patch of
each image whitened, (iv) 8x8 central patch of each im-
age permuted with a ﬁxed random permutation, (v) 12x12
central patch of each image permuted with a ﬁxed random
permutation, and (vi) mirror images of MNIST. This way
each task is as hard as MNIST and the tasks share some
common underlying structure.
Digits : We introduce this smaller dataset which contains 10
tasks with the tthtask being classiﬁcation of digit tfrom
the MNIST dataset.
TDigits : We introduced a transformed variant of MNISTcontaining all ten digits, their mirror images, their upside
down images, and their images when reﬂected about the
main diagonal making a total of 40tasks. This dataset poses
similar difﬁculty as the Digits dataset and we use it for ex-
periments involving longer sequence of tasks.
Shapes : This dataset was extracted from the Quick, Draw!
dataset recently released by Google (2017), which contains
50 million drawings across 345 categories of hand-drawn
images. We subsampled 4;500training images and 500test
images from all geometric shapes in Quick, Draw! (namely
circle, hexagon, octagon, square, triangle and zigzag).
Hindi : Extracted from the Devanagri dataset (Kaggle, 2017)
and contains a sequence of 8tasks, each involving image
classiﬁcation of a hindi language consonant.
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
(a) CNN
 (b) DropCNN
 (c) PPR
(d) EWC
 (e) DGR
 (f) DGDMN
Figure 10: Accuracy curves for Hindi (x: tasks seen, y: classiﬁcation accuracy on task).
8.2. Training algorithm and its parameters
All models were trained with RMSProp (Hinton, 2012) us-
ing learning rate = 0:001,= 0:9,= 10 8and no decay.
We used a batch size of 128and all classiﬁers were provided
20epochs of training when trained jointly, and 6epochs
when trained sequentially over tasks. For generative mod-
els (V AEs), we used gradient clipping in RMSProp with
clipnorm = 1:0andclipvalue = 0:5, and they were
trained for 25epochs regardless of the task or dataset.
8.3. Neural network architectures
We chose all models by ﬁrst training them jointly on all tasks
in a dataset to ensure that our models had enough capacity to
perform reasonably well. But we gave preference to simpler
models over very high capacity models.
Classiﬁer Models : Our implementation of NN, DropNN,
PPR, EWC, learner for DGR and the learner for LTM in
DGDMN used a neural network with three fully-connected
layers with the number of units tuned differently according
to the dataset ( 24;24units for Digits, 48;48for Permnist
and36;36for TDigits). DropNN also added two dropout
layers, one after each hidden layer with droput rate = 0:2
each. The classiﬁers (learners) for Shapes and Hindi datasets
had two convolutional layers ( 12;20 : 33kernels for
Shapes and 24;32 : 33kernels for Hindi) each followed
by a 22max-pooling layer. The last two layers were
fully-connected ( 16;6for Shapes and 144;36for Hindi).
The hidden layers used ReLU activations, the last layer had
a softmax activation, and the model was trained to minimizethe cross-entropy objective function. The STTM learners
employed in DGDMN were smaller for speed and efﬁciency.
Generative models : The generators for DGR and LTM
of DGDMN employed encoders and decoders with two
fully connected hidden layers each with ReLU activation for
Permnist, Digits and TDigits, and convolutional variants for
Shapes and Hindi. The sizes and number of units/kernels in
the layers were tuned independently for each dataset with
an approximate coarse grid-search. The size of the latent
variablezwas set to 32for Digits, 64for Permnist, 96
for TDigits, 32for Shapes and 48for Hindi. The STTM
generators in DGDMN were kept smaller for speed and
efﬁciency concerns.
8.4. Hyperparameters of DGDMN
DGDMN has two new hyperparameters: (i) : minimum
fraction of Nmax reserved for incoming tasks, and (ii)
nSTM : number of STTMs (also sleep/consolidation fre-
quency). Both these have straightforward interpretations
and can be set directly without complex hyperparameter
searches.
ensures continual incorporation of new tasks by guaran-
teeing them a minimum fraction of LTM samples during
consolidation. Given that LTM should perform well on last
Ktasks seen in long task sequence of Ttasks, we observed
that it is safe to assume that about 50% of the LTM would
be crowded by the earlier T Ktasks. The remaining
0:5fraction should be distributed to the last Ktasks. So
choosing=0:5
Kworks well in practice (or as a good start-
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
(a) Shapes
(b) Hindi
Figure 11: Forgetting curves on Shapes and Hindi dataset
(x: tasks seen, y: avg classiﬁcation accuracy on tasks seen).
ing point for tuning). We made this choice in section 4.2
withK= 10 and= 0:05, and hence plotted the average
accuracy over the last 10tasks as a metric.
nSTM controls the consolidation cycle frequency. Increas-
ingnSTM gives more STTMs, less frequent consolidations
and hence a learning speed advantage. But this also means
that fewer samples of previous tasks would participate in
consolidation (due to maximum capacity Nmax of LTM),
and hence more forgetting might occur. This parameter does
not affect learning much till the LTM remains unsaturated
(i.e.Nmax capacity is unﬁlled by generated + new samples)
and becomes active after that. For long sequences of tasks,
we found it best to keep at least 75% of the total samples
from previously learnt tasks to have appropriate retention.
Hence,nSTM can be set as approximately0:25
in practice
(as we did in section 4.2), or as a starting point for tuning.
8.5. Algorithm speciﬁc hyperparameters
PPR : We used a maximum memory capacity of about 3 
6times the number of samples in a task for the dataset
being learnt on (i.e. 18;000for Digits, 60;000for Permnist,
15;000for Shapes and 5;400for Hindi). While replaying,
apart from the task samples, the remaining memory was
ﬁlled with random samples and corresponding labels.
EWC : Most values of the coefﬁcient of the Fisher Infor-
mation Matrix based regularizer between 1to500worked
reasonably well for our datasets. We chose 100for our
(a)
(b)
Figure 12: t-SNE embedding for latent vectors of the V AE
generator on Digits dataset when: (a) tasks are learnt jointly,
and (b) tasks are learnt sequentially.
experiments.
DGR and DGDMN :Nmax for the DGM in DGR and for
the LTM in DGDMN for Digits, Permnist, Shapes and
Hindi was set as the total number of samples in the datasets
(summed over all tasks) to ensure that there was enough
capacity to regenerate the datasets well. For TDigits, we
deliberately restricted memory capacity to see the effects
of learning tasks over a long time and we kept Nmax as
half the total number of samples. nSTM was kept at 2for
Digits, Permnist and Shapes, 5for TDigits and 2for Hindi.
was set to be small, so that it does not come into play
for Digits, Permnist, Shapes and Hindi since we already
provided memories with full capacity for all samples. For
TDigits, we used = 0:05which would let us incorporate
roughly 10out of the 40tasks well.
Deep Generative Dual Memory Network for Continual Learning
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: Visualization of digits from LTM when trained:
(a) jointly, (b) sequentially
(a)
(b)
Figure 14: Curves for DGDMN recog on Digits dataset: (a)
Accuracy curves, (b) Average forgetting curves (x: tasks
seen, y: classiﬁcation accuracy).