Title: The Turking Test: Can Language Models Understand Instructions?

The Turking Test: Can Language Models Understand Instructions?
Avia Efrat
Tel-Aviv University
avia.efrat@gmail.comOmer Levy
Tel-Aviv University
Facebook AI Research
omerlevy@gmail.com
Abstract
Supervised machine learning provides the
learner with a set of input-output examples of
the target task. Humans, however, can also
learn to perform new tasks from instructions
in natural language. Can machines learn to
understand instructions as well? We present
the Turking Test, which examines a model’s
ability to follow natural language instructions
of varying complexity. These range from sim-
ple tasks, like retrieving the nth word of a
sentence, to ones that require creativity, such
as generating examples for SNLI and SQuAD
in place of human intelligence workers (“turk-
ers”). Despite our lenient evaluation method-
ology, we observe that a large pretrained lan-
guage model performs poorly across all tasks.
Analyzing the model’s error patterns reveals
that the model tends to ignore explicit instruc-
tions and often generates outputs that cannot
be construed as an attempt to solve the task.
While it is not yet clear whether instruction
understanding can be captured by traditional
language models, the sheer expressivity of in-
struction understanding makes it an appeal-
ing alternative to the rising few-shot inference
paradigm.
1 Introduction
One of the fundamental problems in AI is how to
build a model that can generalize to new, previ-
ously unseen tasks . Recent work (Brown et al.,
2020) proposes a few-shot inference approach, in
which a massive language model, GPT-3, is con-
ditioned on a few input-output examples of a new
task, followed by the input we wish the model to
process. This approach works surprisingly well on
a wide range of tasks. While humans can often
understand a task from a handful of examples, they
can also beneﬁt from a natural language descrip-
tion of how to perform it, i.e. instructions . Instruc-
tions can describe a task accurately andsuccinctly ;e.g. “Write the fourth word of the following sen-
tence” is a more compact description of a task than
a dozen pairs of sentences and their fourth words.
If language models can perform new tasks by con-
ditioning on input-output pairs, can they do so by
conditioning on instructions as well?
We propose the Turking Test, a series of
instruction-following benchmarks of varying com-
plexity. We begin with turking tasks (Section 3),
where the model is tasked with creating valid
dataset examples of popular NLP datasets (SNLI,
SQuAD, and NewsQA), simulating a task com-
monly done by laypeople on crowdsourcing plat-
forms. In Section 4, we instruct the model to list all
the nouns of a given sentence that satisfy a simple
condition. Finally, we ask the model to write the
nth word/character of a given sentence (Section 5).
Throughout the process, we take a lenient evalu-
ation approach to improve the model’s chance of
being successful, such as selecting the best genera-
tion algorithm and instruction set post-hoc.
We observe poor performance across all exper-
iments when applying the Turking Test to GPT-2
(Radford et al., 2019), a 1.5B parameter language
model.1For example, the model achieves only
2% accuracy on the simple task of writing the nth
word, which can be easily executed by an elemen-
tary school child. We also observe that the model
largely ignores explicit restrictions and conditions
that appear in the instructions, achieving slightly
higher accuracy on open-ended tasks than those
with well-deﬁned answers.
We conclude by looking at instruction under-
standing as a learning paradigm, and show that it
is a strict generalization of the few-shot paradigm.
While few-shot examples can be embedded into
instructions, one clear advantage of the instruction
paradigm is the ability to provide an explicit signal
1Despite submitting an API request in June 2020, we have
not yet received access to GPT-3.arXiv:2010.11982v1  [cs.CL]  22 Oct 2020
of what notto do, where examples can only hope to
provide this negative signal implicitly. While it is
not yet clear whether instruction understanding can
be captured by traditional language models, achiev-
ing such an ability will greatly extend the range of
tasks that we can readily handle and alleviate the
need to annotate large task-speciﬁc datasets.
2 Instruction Understanding
In an instruction understanding task (IUT), a model
is provided with an input Ixthat describes in nat-
ural language a desired output o.Ixis comprised
of a template Ithat we call instructions , which is
instantiated with a resource xto form Ix.Imay or
may not contain input-output examples.
A simple IUT could be “Write the fourth word of
the sentence x.” In this case the instructions are the
entire string except x(hence Iis a template), and
the input Ixcan be formed by setting the resource
xto be “Today was a good day”.
A more challenging IUT could be annotating
examples for a typical NLP dataset, a task often
carried out by human intelligence workers (“turk-
ers”) on crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon
Mechanical Turk. In this case, Iare the instructions
given to the turker, and xis the speciﬁc text used to
create the dataset example (e.g. a paragraph from
Wikipedia in the case of SQuAD). Figure 1 illus-
trates such a task. These IUTs may have multiple
different outputs othat are all equally valid.
2.1 Experiments and Tasks
We perform three sets of experiments to assess in-
struction understanding. Each experiment consists
of two or three tasks of a similar nature.
Turking Tasks (Section 3) Test the model’s abil-
ity to annotate popular datasets such as SQuAD
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016) and SNLI (Bowman et al.,
2015), basing the instructions on the original anno-
tation guidelines and using the development set for
resources.
Listing Nouns (Section 4) Focuses on much
shorter instructions: listing all the nouns of a given
sentence that satisfy a simple condition.
Retrieving an Element by Index (Section 5)
Consists of the simplest tasks, where the model
is instructed to output the nth word or character of
a sentence.
Figure 1: The original instructions of SQuAD 1.1, on
which we base our SQuAD IUT (see Section 3).
2.2 Authoring the Instructions
To increase the model’s chances, we manually re-
ﬁne each task’s instructions using a small subset of
resources, and use the version on which the model
performed best. All the instructions in our experi-
ments go through this iterative reﬁnement process,
regardless of whether a task has a preexisting ver-
sion of instructions (like the turking tasks) or not.
2.3 Model
We use GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) as the lan-
guage model in our experiments via Hugging
Face’s (Wolf et al., 2019) implementation. At the
time of writing, we have yet to be granted access
to GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). We produce outputs
with both greedy decoding and nucleus sampling
(Holtzman et al., 2019) with p= 0:9, generating
up to a maximum number of tokens (tuned per task)
or until the model predicts EOS.
2.4 Evaluation
We use a group of 10 college-graduate English-
speaking annotators to evaluate each of the model’s
outputs and determine whether it indeed follows
the given instructions.
We introduce three relaxations to increase the
model’s chance of success:
The Preﬁx Rule: If a preﬁx of an output is itself
a valid output, then the entire output is considered
valid. We use this rule since the model rarely gener-
ates EOS, so even if it manages to generate a valid
output, it is often followed by irrelevant text (see
Figure 2).
The Introduction Rule: The model is allowed
to generate an “introduction” before the actual an-
swer, such as “Here are the nouns of the sentence:”
(see Figure 2).
Oracle Generation Algorithm: We report the
model’s performance on each task using the gener-
ation algorithm (greedy or nucleus sampling with
p= 0:9) that leads to the best result; the best algo-
rithm is not necessarily the same across all tasks.
3 Turking Tasks
Turking tasks are tasks that are normally carried
out by human intelligence workers (“turkers”) on
crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechan-
ical Turk. Their instructions are given in natural
language, and they require basic language skills
that the vast majority of adults posses.
3.1 Tasks
Our ﬁrst experiment consists of three turking tasks.
We replicate the annotation processes of SNLI
(Bowman et al., 2015), SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016), and NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2016) – each
time replacing the human turker with the lan-
guage model. These popular datasets have high
inter-annotator agreement, indicating that laypeo-
ple can understand their instructions reasonably
well. While there is prior work on learning to ask
reading comprehension questions from thousands
of examples (Du et al., 2017), our goal here is to
test how well a model performs when given the
same information as human annotators.
SNLI Given a caption of a photo (without the
photo itself), produce three sentences (hypotheses):
one that is deﬁnitely a true description of the photo
(entailment), one that might be a true description
of the photo (neutral), and one that is deﬁnitely not
a true description of the photo (contradiction).
SQuAD Given a paragraph from Wikipedia,
write question-answer pairs, where the questions
are about the paragraph and their answers are spans
of text from the paragraph.
NewsQA Given highlights from a news article
(without the article itself), write questions about
either the highlights or the article (the turker is
to assume what is reasonable to be written in the
article given the highlights). Figure 2 shows our
NewsQA IUT.
Evaluation Criteria In addition to the preﬁx and
the introduction rules (Section 2.4), we further re-
lax the requirements of a valid output. For SNLI,
the generated hypotheses do not need to be ex-
plicitly labeled entailment/neutral/contradiction; as
long as the ﬁrst three sentences can form a valid
SNLI example (in any order), the output is valid.Write questions about the highlights of a story.
Steps
1. Read the highlights
2. Write questions about the highlights
Example
High lights
Sarah Palin from Alaska meets with McCain
Fareed Zakaria says John McCain didnotputcoun tryﬁrst
with hischoice
Zakaria: This is“hell ofatime” forPalin tostart think ing
about national, global issues
Questions
The questions can refer directly to the highlights, for example:
Where isPalin from?
What didFareed sayabout John McCain’s choice?
Who isthink ingabout global issues?
Questions must always be related to the highlights but their
answers don’t have to be in the highlights. You can assume
that the highlights summarize a document which can answer
other questions for example:
What wasthemeet ingabout?
What wasMcCain’s choice?
What issues isPalin think ingabout?
Other Rules
Do not re-use the same or very similar questions.
Questions should be written to have short answers.
Do not write “how” nor “why” type questions since their
answers are not short. “How far/long/many/much” are okay.
Here arethehighlights:
Math geeks andotherscelebrate PiDay everyMarch 14
Pi,orroughly 3.14, istheratioofcircumference todiameter
ofacircle
ThePiDay holidayidea started attheExplorato rium mu-
seum inSanFrancisco
AlbertEinstein wasalsoborn onMarch 14
Write questions about them:
Here arequestions about thehighlights:
1. When is Pi Day celebrated?
2. What is the value of Pi up to the second decimal digit?
Another thing isthatPiisimportantinmath ematics.
Figure 2: An example of the NewsQA IUT with a po-
tential output. Input: The input Ixis composed of the
instruction template I, which is ﬁxed, and the variable
resource x(green). Note that Icontains an example re-
source and corresponding valid outputs (red), which are
different from the actual resource x. The instructions I
are modeled after the original instructions of NewsQA
(Trischler et al., 2016), but replace visual HTML cues
(e.g “Ask a question here.” from Figure 1) with purely
textual prompts (blue), as without them the model’s ac-
curacy was 0% on every turking task. Output: The
ﬁrst line (gray) demonstrates the introduction rule, and
the last line (gray) demonstrates the preﬁx rule. The
middle two lines are the only ones being evaluated.
Task Accuracy Consistency
SNLI 0.4% 12.0%
SQuAD 0.2% 6.0%
NewsQA 4.2% 22.0%
Table 1: Results on the turking tasks. An output is ac-
curate if it correctly follows the instructions of the IUT.
An output is form consistent if it produces an output in
the correct format , but does not necessarily have correct
content (see Section 3.3 for a formal deﬁnition).
For SQuAD, while the original instructions encour-
age writing ﬁve question-answer pairs, we require
only three questions (and no answers ), matching
the requirements of the other question annotation
task, NewsQA.2
3.2 Experimental Setting
We generate 500 outputs for each task. The outputs
are generated using 100 different resources with
ﬁve nucleus ( p= 0:9) generations per resource, as
preliminary experiments show that greedy genera-
tion leads to 0% accuracy across all turking tasks.
Each annotator was given 50 outputs to score. We
found very high inter-annotator agreement (98%
observed agreement) based on a sample from all
three tasks.
For each task we only select resources that the
original human turkers found easy to annotate. In
SNLI, we use captions (premises) that have com-
plete agreement (5/5) on each of their hypotheses.
In SQuAD, we use paragraphs that have at least
ﬁve questions. In NewsQA, we use highlights that
have at least six answerable questions.
3.3 Results
Table 1 shows the results on the turking tasks. Re-
sults on SNLI and SQuAD are very poor, with only
0.4% and 0.2% of the outputs correctly following
the instructions. Results on NewsQA (4.2%), al-
beit very low as well, are still more than an order
of magnitude higher than the other question gener-
ation IUT, SQuAD.
One possible explanation is that NewsQA con-
tains an example in the instruction template (one-
shot), whereas SQuAD does not (zero-shot). How-
ever, SNLI’s instructions also contain an example,
and its results are on par with SQuAD. An alter-
native explanation is that SQuAD’s instructions
require the questions to be answerable by a span
from the resource, while NewsQA does not. This
2Appendix A contains the instructions for all our IUTs.Resource x Five children are playing a video game.
A man walking.
Output o A man wearing a blue hat is walking.
A man sitting on a bench.
Imaginary xA man wearing a hat is walking.
Figure 3: An example of a form consistent output of
the SNLI turking task. Although the output ois not
correct w.r.t the given resource x, there still could exist
a resource x, e.g. “a man wearing a hat is walking”,
thatois correct with respect to it. With this x, the
generated sentences are (in order) entailed, neutral, and
contradicting.
means that a NewsQA output can be valid just by
asking reasonable on-topic questions. We suspect
that the open-ended nature of the NewsQA IUT is
particularly favorable to language models, as sub-
sequent experiments show that the model fails to
perform very simple IUTs with well-deﬁned out-
puts. (Sections 4 and 5).
Form Consistency As turking tasks are rather
challenging IUTs, we further evaluate performance
by introducing a more lenient metric, form con-
sistency . Formally, an output oisform consistent
with respect to an input Ixif there could exist a
resource xin the context of the task such that o
would be considered accurate with respect to Ix.
Figure 3 shows an example of a form consistent
(but incorrect) SNLI output.
Table 1 shows the model’s form consistency on
each task, based on a random sample of 50 exam-
ples. Although form consistency sets a low bar for
the model, the vast majority of its outputs are not
even in the right format. For example, we observe
that 94% of SQuAD’s outputs are not even form
consistent, i.e. do not contain three questions that
could be answered by spans from any reasonable
Wikipedia paragraph. Even for the less restrictive
NewsQA IUT, we ﬁnd that 78% of the outputs
cannot be tied to any reasonable news article.
3.4 Error Analysis
We randomly sample 150 outputs from each turking
task and analyze common errors. Figure 4 shows
recurring mistake patterns.
Continuing the Resource Instead of following
the instructions, the model just generates a contin-
uation of the resource, such as adding more high-
lights in NewsQA (see Figure 4a). This is more
prevalent when the resource is short, occurring in
(a) Continuing the Resource (NewsQA)
Highlights
Anatomy Lab app allows users to dissect a virtual cadaver
Researchers say app is aimed at medical and anatomy stu-
dents
The app has so far sold more than 3,000 copiesQuestions
Scientists say that the new apps offer a new way of studying
human anatomy
Students can also use the apps to answer more traditional lab
questions
(b) Continuing the Resource (SNLI)
Premise
A group of people are gathered in the woods around trees and
a ladder.Hypotheses
On the left is a tree. On the right is a ladder. The person is
sitting at the top. A rainstorm is rolling in. Around him are
two groups of people having a picnic.
(c) Continuing the Instructions (SNLI)
Premise
A young man plays a racing video game.Hypotheses
See if your caption reveals what the dog is doing. Example:
If the man and dog are playing a racing video game, then they
might be playing a billiards game.
(d) Non Resource-Speciﬁc Questions (SQuAD)
Paragraph
There are over 10,000 objects made from silver or gold in the
collection, the display (about 15% of the collection) is divided
into secular and sacred covering both...Questions
1. Is the passage interesting/rich/interesting?
2. Was the passage organized or extensive?
3. Was the passage topical or deliberately obscure?
(e) Unrelated Questions (NewsQA)
Highlights
Among items auctioned Saturday: jacket, song lyrics,
sketches, dental mold
Famous rhinestone-studded glove fetched $420,000...Questions
Does this item ﬁt with Palin’s personality?
Do they embody her political sensibilities?
Are they a match with McCain’s image of family values?
(f) Grounding on Instruction Example (SNLI)
Premise
A woman wearing sunglasses is holding a pink cellphone to
her ear.Hypotheses
A woman wearing sunglasses is holding a pink cellphone to
her ear.
Some puppiesarerunning tocatch astick.
There areanimals outdoors.
(g) Ignoring Instructions (NewsQA)
Highlights
Inter Milan go two points clear of second-placed Roma with
3-1 win over lowly Atalanta
Wesley Sneijder in doubt for Wednesday’s trip...Questions
Why are the European champions so close to relegation?
Why are Napoli’s 100,000 fans not up in arms?
Why does Roma sit fourth?
Figure 4: Common mistake patterns on the turking tasks. The resource xis on the left and output ois on the right.
Text in italics is not a part of the resource or the output.
24% and 17% of NewsQA’s and SNLI’s outputs
respectively, but only 3% of the time in SQuAD.
Continuing the Instructions The model gener-
ates more instructions instead of following them
(see Figure 4c). This is particularly prevalent in
SNLI, where it occurs in 19% of all outputs.
Ungrounded Questions Whereas the previous
two patterns are much less common in SQuAD,
in 38% of its outputs allthe questions are either
so general that they could apply to any resource
(23%, see Figure 4d) or unrelated to the resource
(15%). This also happens in NewsQA 9% of the
time (Figure 4e).Grounding on the Instruction Example Both
SNLI’s and NewsQA’s instructions contain an
example resource-output pair (see Figure 2 for
NewsQA). 11% of SNLI’s and 6% of NewsQA’s
outputs are grounded on these examples, and they
are always inaccurate. The grounding is either ex-
plicit (copying the example verbatim, highlighted
in Figure 4f) or implicit (highlighted in 4c and 4e).
Ignoring Explicit Restrictions NewsQA’s in-
structions explicitly forbid using “why” and some
“how” questions (see Figure 2). Nevertheless, 49%
of NewsQA’s outputs contain at least one such ques-
tion, indicating the model does not follow superﬁ-
cial restrictions in the instructions (see Figure 4g).
Case Sound Number Instructions Possible Output
lower singularList all the singular nouns from the sentence “We have
a meeting on Sunday” that start with a lowercase letter.The nouns are: meeting
upper consonantList all the nouns from the sentence “We have a meet-
ing on Sunday” that start with an uppercase consonant.We, Sunday
vowel pluralList all the plural nouns from the sentence “We have a
meeting on Sunday” that start with a vowel.
Figure 5: Three examples of the conditioned noun listing task with possible valid outputs for the resource “We have
a meeting on Sunday.” No nouns satisfy the third example’s condition, and it is therefore omitted (see Section 4.2).
4 Listing Nouns
Following the language model’s poor performance
on turking tasks (Section 3), we test whether it can
follow the instructions of a simpler linguistic task:
listing nouns of a given sentence.
4.1 Tasks
The ﬁrst noun listing task is straightforward:
List all the nouns of the sentence “ x”.
The second task is a variation on the ﬁrst: given a
sentence, list all nouns that satisfy a condition . A
condition is a conjunction of two properties from
the following three: case (starts with an upper-
case/lowercase letter), sound (starts with a conso-
nant/vowel), and number (singular/plural). There
are 12 possible conditions, three of which are illus-
trated in Figure 5.
4.2 Experimental Setting
We sample 100 sentences from GLUE’s diagnostic
dataset (Wang et al., 2018), which spans ﬁve dif-
ferent domains and diverse linguistic phenomena,
and use them as resources to instantiate inputs for
both tasks. We pair every resource to each of the
12 possible conditions and ﬁlter cases where no
nouns satisfy the condition, leaving a total of 100
examples for unconditioned noun listing and 689
examples in the conditioned setting.
For each input, we perform one greedy genera-
tion and one p= 0:9nucleus generation, limiting
the output to jxj+ 20 tokens (where jxjis the num-
ber of tokens in the resource sentence). As nucleus
generation led to 0% accuracy on both tasks, we
only present the results of the greedy generation
(see Oracle Generation Algorithm in Section 2.4).
4.3 Results
Table 2 shows the results on the noun listing tasks.
Although the instructions of these tasks are shorterTask Accuracy
List all nouns 9.0%
List all nouns satisfying a condition 3.5%
Table 2: Performance on noun listing tasks using
greedy decoding.
Figure 6: The distribution of sentence length (in num-
ber of words) over all resources (100 sentences) versus
those resources for which the model correctly predicted
the full list of nouns in the unconditioned task (9 sen-
tences). Medians in white, middle quartiles in black.
and simpler than in turking tasks, results are still
poor, with only 9% accuracy on the unconditioned
task, and with successes highly skewed towards
shorter sentences, as shown in Figure 6. Moreover,
adding a simple condition to the task’s instructions
results in a substantial drop in performance, as only
3.5% of the conditioned task’s outputs are correct,
with no signiﬁcant performance difference across
different conditions. This resonates the ﬁndings
from Section 3.4, as again the model struggles ad-
hering to simple restrictions in the instructions.
4.4 Error Analysis
In both tasks greedy generation outputs are some-
times comprised of repeated copies of either the
resource or the entire instruction. It occurs in 10%
of the unconditioned task’s outputs and in 30% of
Task Accuracy Baseline
nth word 2.0% 6.4%
nth character 1.3% 13.8%
Table 3: Performance on the nth element tasks using
greedy decoding. The baseline writes the most com-
mon word (“the”) or character (“e”) in the language.
the conditioned task’s outputs, always resulting in
an invalid output. While it has been shown that nu-
cleus sampling can mitigate repetitions (Holtzman
et al., 2019), we ﬁnd it leads to 0% accuracy on
both tasks.
5 Retrieving Elements by Index
Listing nouns (Section 4) still requires some lin-
guistic knowledge. For our last experiment, we
use instructions so simple that they could be imple-
mented by a single line of code in Python: retriev-
ing the nth word or character in a sentence.
5.1 Tasks
We present the model with two retrieval tasks:
(1) Write the nth word from the sentence “ x”.
(2) Write the nth character from the sentence “ x”.
While optimizing the instructions (see Section 2.2),
we found that better results were achieved with a
slight variation of the second task:
Write down the nth letter from the sentence “ x”:
5.2 Experimental Setting
We use all 832 sentences from GLUE’s diagnostic
dataset (Wang et al. 2018) as resources to instanti-
ate inputs for both tasks. We limit the word index to
20 and the character index to 40. For the character
task, we never ask for an index of a whitespace char-
acter. For each sentence we perform one greedy
generation and one p= 0:9nucleus generation,
for a total of 1664 outputs per task. We generate
jxj+ 20 tokens for each input, where jxjis the
number of tokens in the resource sentence. Since
the evaluation of these tasks is simple and unam-
biguous, we preform it ourselves. As in Section 4,
we only report results based on greedy generation
since nucleus sampling was signiﬁcantly worse on
both tasks (see Oracle Generation Algorithm in
Section 2.4).5.3 Results
Table 3 shows the results on the nth element tasks.
The model does not exceed 2% accuracy on either
task, well below the simple baseline of writing the
most common word or character.
5.4 Error Analysis
In Section 4.4 we saw that in the conditioned noun
listing task either the resource or the entire input
are repeated in the output 30% of the time. Here the
situation is even worse: repetition occurs in 46%
and 59% of the nth word and nth character outputs
respectively, always resulting in an incorrect output.
The fact that such a large percentage of outputs is
comprised of senseless repetitions indicates that the
model fails to understand these trivial instructions.
To analyze common repetition patterns, we sam-
ple 50 repetition outputs from each task. Even
though these tasks are similar and have almost iden-
tical instructions, we ﬁnd that their repetition pat-
terns signiﬁcantly differ, suggesting the model is
hyper-sensitive to small changes in the instructions.
For example, while 96% of the sampled nth char-
acter outputs begin with the resource, none of the
sampled nth word outputs do. In addition, while
54% of the sampled nth character outputs are repe-
titions of only the resource, 100% of the sampled
nth word outputs involve repetitions of both the
resource and some variant of the instructions.
6 Discussion: The Instruction Paradigm
Currently, the prevailing paradigm in NLP is su-
pervised learning from many labeled examples, of-
ten supported by pretraining `a la BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018). Recently, GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)
demonstrated the effectiveness of an alternative
paradigm, few-shot inference, by conditioning a
massive pretrained language model with only a
handful of task-speciﬁc examples at inference time.
In this work, we explore a third alternative, the in-
struction paradigm , where the model is conditioned
on a natural language description of the task.
The instruction paradigm is a strict generaliza-
tion of GPT-3’s few-shot paradigm. Instructions
generalize few-shot inference because they may
contain examples. In fact, Section 3 shows two
tasks (SNLI and NewsQA), where examples of ex-
pected inputs and outputs are embedded into the
instructions. This generalization is strict because
instructions can convey information that examples
cannot. For example, instructions can explicitly
state what is nota valid output (e.g. “Do not write
‘why’ questions...” – NewsQA), whereas examples,
even more than a few, can only hope to provide this
negative signal implicitly.
While the instruction paradigm is very expres-
sive and natural, it also poses a serious challenge.
Throughout this paper, we observe that a large lan-
guage model fails to follow a series of gradually
simpler instructions. While it is possible that a
larger language model or one trained on instruc-
tional language may perform better, it might also
be the case, as posited by Bender and Koller (2020),
that models may require some form of grounding
beyond the linguistic form to learn how to follow
instructions and pass the Turking Test.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Blavatnik
Fund, the Alon Scholarship, and the Tel Aviv Uni-
versity Data Science Center. We are grateful for
the help of Uri Shaham, Yuval Kirstain, Avia Ami-
tay, Zohar Arnon, Dafna Barzilai, Sivan Barzily,
Pavel Brodsky, Anna Landa, Tomer Landsberger,
Jonathan Rosen, and Ran Ziv in human evaluation
and feedback.
References
Emily M. Bender and Alexander Koller. 2020. Climb-
ing towards NLU: On meaning, form, and under-
standing in the age of data. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics , pages 5185–5198, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large an-
notated corpus for learning natural language infer-
ence. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) . Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen,
Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-
ers.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: pre-training ofdeep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. CoRR , abs/1810.04805.
Xinya Du, Junru Shao, and Claire Cardie. 2017. Learn-
ing to ask: Neural question generation for reading
comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1342–1352,
Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin
Choi. 2019. The curious case of neural text degener-
ation. CoRR , abs/1904.09751.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
blog, 1(8):9.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev,
and Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100, 000+ ques-
tions for machine comprehension of text. CoRR ,
abs/1606.05250. Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.
Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Har-
ris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Ka-
heer Suleman. 2016. Newsqa: A machine compre-
hension dataset. CoRR , abs/1611.09830.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2018.
GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-
form for natural language understanding. CoRR ,
abs/1804.07461.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, R ´emi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2019.
Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural
language processing.
A All Instructions
This appendix contains the full version for all the in-
structions we used throughout Sections 3-5. All in-
structions are additionally appended with the new-
line.
We will show you the caption for a photo. We will not show you the photo. Using
only the caption and what you know about the world:
• Write one alternate caption that is definitely a true description of the photo.
Example: For the caption "Two dogs are running through a field." you could write
"There are animals outdoors."
• Write one alternate caption that might be a true description of the photo.
Example: For the caption "Two dogs are running through a field." you could write
"Some puppies are running to catch a stick."
• Write one alternate caption that is definitely a false description of the
photo. Example: For the caption "Two dogs are running through a field. you could
write "The pets are sitting on a couch." This is different from the maybe correct
category because it’s impossible for the dogs to be both running and sitting.
Here’s the caption: " resource ".
According to the above instructions, write three alternate captions below, one
that is definitely a true description of the photo, one that might be a true
description of the photo, and one that is definitely a false description of the
photo:
Figure 7: Full instructions of the SNLI IUT (Section 3). To instantiate an input, the highlighted part in italics is
replaced with a resource – a caption from the SNLI development set.
Read the following paragraph and ask 5 questions about it! If you can’t ask 5
questions, ask 4 or 3 (worse), but do your best to ask 5. The answers to these
questions must be answerable by a span of text from the passage.
resource
When asking questions, avoid using the same words/phrases as in the paragraph.
Also, you are encouraged to pose hard questions.
Now according to the instructions above, ask five questions about the paragraph:
Figure 8: Full instructions of the SQuAD IUT (Section 3). To instantiate an input, the highlighted part in italics is
replaced with a resource – a Wikipedia paragraph from the SQuAD development set.
Write Questions From A Summary
Overview
Write questions about the highlights of a story.
Steps
1. Read the highlights
2. Write questions about the highlights
Example
Highlights
• Sarah Palin from Alaska meets with McCain
• Fareed Zakaria says John McCain did not put country first with his choice
• Zakaria: This is "hell of a time" for Palin to start thinking about national,
global issues
Questions
The questions can refer directly to the highlights, for example:
• Where is Palin from?
• What did Fareed say about John McCain’s choice?
• Who is thinking about global issues?
Questions must always be related to the highlights but their answers don’t have
to be in the highlights. You can assume that the highlights summarize a document
which can answer other questions for example:
• What was the meeting about?
• What was McCain’s choice?
• What issues is Palin thinking about?
Other Rules
• Do not re-use the same or very similar questions.
• Questions should be written to have short answers.
• Do not write "how" nor "why" type questions since their answers are not
short. "How far/long/many/much" are okay.
Here are the highlights:
resource
Write questions about them:
Figure 9: Full instructions of the NewsQA IUT (Section 3). To instantiate an input, the highlighted part in italics
is replaced with a resource – article highlights from the NewsQA development set.
List all the nouns of the sentence " resource ".
Figure 10: Full instructions of the unconditioned noun listing IUT (Section 4). To instantiate an input, the high-
lighted part in italics is replaced with a resource – a sentence from the GLUE diagnostic dataset.
List all the nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with a lowercase
consonant.
List all the nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with an uppercase
consonant.
List all the nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with a lowercase vowel.
List all the nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with an uppercase
vowel.
List all the singular nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with a
lowercase letter.
List all the plural nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with a lowercase
letter.
List all the singular nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with an
uppercase letter.
List all the plural nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with an
uppercase letter.
List all the singular nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with a
consonant.
List all the plural nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with a
consonant.
List all the singular nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with a vowel.
List all the plural nouns from the sentence " resource " that start with a vowel.
Figure 11: Full instructions of the conditioned noun listing IUT (Section 4), for each of the 12 possible conditions.
To instantiate an input, the highlighted part in italics is replaced with a resource – a sentence from the GLUE
diagnostic dataset.
"Write the nth word from the sentence " resource ".
Figure 12: Full instructions of the nth word IUT (Section 5). To instantiate an input, nis replaced with a number
between 1 an 20 (up to the sentence’s length in words) and resource is replaced with a sentence from the GLUE
diagnostic dataset.
"Write down the nth letter from the sentence " resource ".
Figure 13: Full instructions of the nth character IUT (Section 5). To instantiate an input, nis replaced with a
number between 1 an 40 (up to the sentence’s length in characters) and resource is replaced with a sentence from
the GLUE diagnostic dataset.