Title: Adversarial Environment Generation for Learning to Navigate the Web

Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
ADVERSARIAL ENVIRONMENT GENERATION FOR
LEARNING TO NAVIGATE THE WEB
Izzeddin Gur, Natasha Jaques, Kevin Malta, Manoj Tiwari, Honglak Lee, Aleksandra Faust
Google Research, Mountain View, CA, 94043
fizzeddin,natashajaques,kmalta,mjtiwari,honglak,sandrafaust g@google.com
ABSTRACT
Learning to autonomously navigate the web is a difﬁcult sequential decision-
making task. The state and action spaces are large and combinatorial in nature,
and websites are dynamic environments consisting of several pages. One of the
bottlenecks of training web navigation agents is providing a learnable curriculum
of training environments that can cover the large variety of real-world websites.
Therefore, we propose using Adversarial Environment Generation (AEG) to gen-
erate challenging web environments in which to train reinforcement learning (RL)
agents. We provide a new benchmarking environment, gMiniWoB, which enables
an RL adversary to use compositional primitives to learn to generate arbitrarily
complex websites. To train the adversary, we propose a new technique for max-
imizing regret using the difference in the scores obtained by a pair of navigator
agents. Our results show that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms prior meth-
ods for minimax regret AEG. The regret objective trains the adversary to design
a curriculum of environments that are “just-the-right-challenge” for the naviga-
tor agents; our results show that over time, the adversary learns to generate in-
creasingly complex web navigation tasks. The navigator agents trained with our
technique learn to complete challenging, high-dimensional web navigation tasks,
such as form ﬁlling, booking a ﬂight etc. We show that the navigator agent trained
with our proposed Flexible b-PAIRED technique signiﬁcantly outperforms com-
petitive automatic curriculum generation baselines—including a state-of-the-art
RL web navigation approach—on a set of challenging unseen test environments,
and achieves more than 80% success rate on some tasks.
1 I NTRODUCTION
The goal of this work is to train reinforcement learning (RL) agents to navigate the web; speciﬁcally,
by correctly entering relevant information into unknown, real-world websites. This ability could
enable a user to issue requests such as, “Buy me a plane ticket to Los Angeles leaving on Friday”,
or “Post the following on my social media account”, and have the RL agent automatically handle
the details of completing these tasks. However, the complexity and diversity of real-world websites
makes this a formidable challenge.
To enable our agents to generalize to novel websites, they operate directly on the Document Object
Model (DOM). The DOM is a tree of web elements, and agents must correctly select and ﬁll out
the appropriate elements. This makes the state-action space of the problem prohibitively large.
Even if the agent is able to navigate the site to arrive at the correct form, and eventually select the
correct element (e.g. the ‘departure’ ﬁeld for booking a ﬂight), there are many possible values it
can insert (e.g. all user input). To mitigate this issue, past work (Shi et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018)
has relied on behavior cloning from expert demonstrations. However, this approach is brittle and
cannot scale effectively. It is not possible to obtain demonstrations for navigating every possible
website, especially since sites are frequently changed and updated. If there is no demonstration data
available, a model based on imitation learning is unlikely to be able to generalize to a novel website.
Successfully navigating the wide range of real-world websites requires training an agent on a large
distribution of possible tasks and environments. The question is how to create a distribution that
will not only cover most real-world tasks, but can be presented in a curriculum that is learnable by
1arXiv:2103.01991v1  [cs.LG]  2 Mar 2021
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
(a) Early training
 (b) Mid training
 (c) Late training
 (d) Test
Figure 1: Samples of generated web pages from selected websites taken from early, middle, and late snapshots
of the training (a-c) and unseen test “Login” website (d). Over time, the number of pages in a website decreases
but the density of elements in a page increases with more task-oriented elements.
the agent. One option would be to manually design a pre-deﬁned curriculum of hand-built websites.
However, this is tedious, time-consuming, error-prone, and brittle; the designer is likely to miss
some real-world edge cases. Another option would be to apply domain randomization (DR) (as
in e.g. Jakobi (1997); Sadeghi & Levine (2016); Tobin et al. (2017)) to randomize parameters of
websites, or automatically increase some parameter controlling the difﬁculty over time (as in Gur
et al. (2019)). However, both approaches may fail to cover important test cases, and cannot tailor
the difﬁculty of the parameter conﬁguration to the current ability of the agent.
Therefore, in this work we leverage cutting-edge techniques for Adversarial Environment Gener-
ation (AEG) to build a curriculum of challenging web navigation tasks. Speciﬁcally, we train an
adversarial RL agent to learn to create new pages in a web site in order to exploit the current weak-
nesses in an agent that is learning to navigate the web. To enable this AEG web-design technique,
we build a new framework, gMiniWoB, that enables an adversary to construct websites out of com-
mon design primitives such as navigation bars ,product carousels ,item decks ,web forms , and item
carts . We are releasing this environment in open-source in the hopes of enabling further progress on
this problem. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to apply AEG to web navigation.
The goal of AEG is to automatically generate a curriculum of training environments that will cover
the space of possible websites, and thereby enable generalization to real-world web navigation tasks.
However, if we naively apply a minimax adversary—i.e. an adversary that seeks to minimize the
performance of the learning agent—this curriculum is unlikely to emerge. This is because the ad-
versary is motivated to create the hardest possible website, rather than tailor the difﬁculty of the site
to the current skill level of the agent. Instead, PAIRED (Protagonist Antagonist Induced Regret En-
vironment Design) (Dennis et al., 2020), a recently proposed AEG technique, trains the adversary to
maximize the regret . We improve upon the original PAIRED algorithm with two novel algorithmic
enhancements. First, we propose a more ﬂexible method for computing the regret which makes our
algorithm less vulnerable to becoming stuck in a local minimum. Second, we introduce an explicit
budgeting mechanism, such that the adversary is penalized for making more complex environments
when the agents cannot solve the task, and otherwise rewarded for making complex environments.
This paper makes the following contributions: i) A new benchmarking environment, gMiniWoB,
which empowers the use of Adversarial Environment Generation for web navigation, by enabling
the construction of websites out of compositional design primitives; ii) The Flexible b-PAIRED
algorithm, which computes a more stable estimate of regret and directly incentivizes the adversary to
tailor the complexity of the generated environment to the performance of the agent; and iii) empirical
results demonstrating that Flexible b-PAIRED generates a curriculum of increasingly challenging
websites, and produces agents that can successfully generalize to navigating complex, unseen sites at
test time. Our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms prior work on minimax regret AEG (Dennis et al.,
2020), as well as a state-of-the-art approach for using RL to train web navigation agents (Gur et al.,
2019). We hope that this work will provide a meaningful way to make progress on the exceptionally
challenging problem of learning to navigate the web, and will be of interest to the wider RL research
community for auto-curriculum design in complex and compositional environments.
2
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
2 R ELATED WORK
Prior work on training agents to navigate the web introduced the Miniwob (Shi et al., 2017) and
Miniwob++ (Liu et al., 2018) environments, but relied on obtaining expert demonstrations for each
website, which cannot scale effectively to cover the large variety of real-world websites, and cannot
adapt to changing websites. Further, these methods failed to solve complex web navigation tasks
such as ﬂight booking or social media interaction (Gur et al., 2019).
Gur et al. (2019) take a step farther by training an RL agent to solve complex web navigation tasks
using a scheduled curriculum. The curriculum linearly increases a parameter p, in which 1 p
controls the number of web elements that are solved by querying an oracle policy, which is obtained
via expert data. This work differs in several ways. First, we do not rely on any expert demonstrations
to augment sparse rewards. We use AEG to automatically learn to generate a curriculum of web
navigation tasks that are tailored to the current skill level of the agent. Next, we make no assumption
on the availability of any website while they assume websites are given a priori . Lastly, our web
navigation agents generalize to unseen environments.
Multi-agent training can be an effective method for automatically generating a curriculum of RL
tasks (e.g. Leibo et al. (2019); Matiisen et al. (2019); Graves et al. (2017); Portelas et al. (2020)).
For example, Asymmetric Self Play (ASP) (Sukhbaatar et al., 2017) trains two agents, in which the
second agent must learn to repeat the actions taken by the ﬁrst, demonstrator agent. Both agents play
in the same, ﬁxed environment. In contrast, we use a third agent to learn to generate challenging
new environments. POET (Wang et al., 2019; 2020) is an AEG technique which uses a population
of adversaries to generate the terrain a 2D walker agent must learn to navigate. To create a cur-
riculum, POET requires generating many new environments, testing all agents within each one, and
discarding environments based on a manually chosen a reward threshold, which wastes a signiﬁ-
cant amount of computation. Campero et al. (2020) use a teacher to propose navigation tasks; the
teacher’s reward is based on whether the agent takes more steps than a threshold, a hyperparmeter
that is linearly increased over the course of training.
Most closely related to our work is PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020), which is an AEG method for
training agents with minimal regret that works by constraining the environment-generating adversary
using the performance of a second agent. However, PAIRED only demonstrated results on simple
gridworld environments, and did not expand to the type of complex, high-dimensional state-action
space required for web navigation. We improve on PAIRED using a more ﬂexible estimate of the
regret, as well as a budget mechanism, and show that this signiﬁcantly improves performance.
3 B ACKGROUND
3.1 W EBNAVIGATION PROBLEM
Following previous work (Shi et al., 2017; Gur et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2018), we formulate web
navigation as a sequential decision making problem where we train an agent, parameterized by a
network(atjst; i), that maps an input state stto output actions atto maximize the cumulative
discounted reward, .i.e., O=PT
t=0trtwherertis the reward at time step t,is a discount factor,
andTis the length of an episode. We use the web page and user instruction as the input state. The
web page is dynamically updated at each time step, while the instruction is ﬁxed at the beginning of
an episode. We represent web pages using Document Object Model (DOM), a tree of elements in a
page, where each element is denoted by a set of (attribute, value) pairs and an array of features (such
as spatial coordinates). Instructions are given as a set of ﬁelds where each ﬁeld is a (key, value) pair.
Keys are ﬁxed for each task and values dynamically change based on user input.
Each action is represented as a tuple (element, ﬁeld) that denotes acting on the element using the ﬁeld
as an input; i.e. typing the value of the ﬁeld into the element. Agents receive a task success reward
(1.0 or -1.0) at the end of each episode, a potential-based reward when the value of an element in the
page is updated, and a small penalty each timestep to encourage efﬁcient navigation. As an exam-
ple, consider a ﬂight booking task where the agent is given an instruction f"Departure Date":
"Friday", Destination Airport: "Los Angeles (LAX)" g. The agent ﬁrst picks
a ﬁeld (e.g. destination airport) and ﬁnds the corresponding text box in the page; then the corre-
3
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
DIV
#text VAR* 
INPUT text=VAR* LABEL* DIV
INPUT text=”Username” DIV
#text “First Name” 
INPUT LABEL 
(a) A fully speciﬁed DOM prim-
itive where a label is created and
its text is assigned.
DIV
#text VAR* 
INPUT text=VAR* LABEL* 
DIV
INPUT text=”Username” DIV
#text “First Name” 
INPUT LABEL (b) An underspeciﬁed DOM
tree template. The text box is al-
ways included, its text and label
element are variables.
DIV
#text VAR* 
INPUT text=VAR* LABEL* 
DIV
INPUT text=”Username” DIV
#text “First Name” 
INPUT LABEL (c) A fully speciﬁed DOM prim-
itive where only the inner text
within the text box is assigned.
Figure 2: An example underspeciﬁed DOM tree template (b) and its instantiations (a,c) with different
values. (*) indicates a variable; either an element or one of its attributes. (a) is used in Page 1 and
(c) is used in Page 2 in Figure 3.
sponding value (“Los Angeles (LAX)”) typed in to the text box. If this value is correct, the agent
receives a positive reward of 1=NwhereNis the number of ﬁelds.
3.2 P ROTAGONIST ANTAGONIST INDUCED REGRET ENVIRONMENT DESIGN (PAIRED)
Adversarial Environment Generation (AEG) trains an adversary policy Eto design environments
to minimize the performance of an agent’s policy, P. LetRP
i=PT
t=1trP
tbe the total reward
received by the agent for trajectory i. In minimax AEG, the objective for the adversary is simply:
 RP. Thus, minimax adversaries are incentivized to create excessively difﬁcult or impossible envi-
ronments, which may not enable the agent to learn. Instead, PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020) trains the
adversary to maximize the agent’s regret , which is deﬁned as the difference between the agent’s re-
turn and the return of the optimal policy, R RP. When the reward function includes an incentive
to complete the task more efﬁciently (which is true in our case), the regret will be highest for easy
tasks which could be completed in a few steps by the optimal policy, but which the current policy
fails to complete. Therefore, an adversary that maximizes the regret will continue to propose easier
tasks until the agent begins to solve them, making regret a desirable objective for AEG.
To estimate the regret, PAIRED introduces a third agent, the antagonist (with policy A), and con-
strains the adversary to only generate feasible environments which the antagonist can complete.
When the adversary generates an environment E, both the protagonist and antagonist collect M
trajectories with returns RP
1;:::;RP
M;RA
1;:::;RA
MinE. The regret is then estimated as:
REGRET = max
iRA
i 1
MMX
m=1RP
m (1)
As Dennis et al. (2020) show, if the adversary and antagonist coordinate and reach a Nash equilib-
rium with the protagonist, then the protagonist will have learned to minimize the regret. However, in
practice gradient-based multi-agent RL has no convergence guarantees, is highly non-stationary, and
will often fail to converge (Mazumdar et al., 2019a;b). If the antagonist and adversary in PAIRED
fail to coordinate, then PAIRED minimizes regret with respect to the antagonist’s policy. In that case,
the objective in Equation 1 only forces the protagonist to learn to be as good as the antagonist. If the
antagonist fails to improve, or reaches a local optimum, then the adversary cannot continue to train
the protagonist. In Section 4.3 we propose an improved objective which addresses this problem.
4 W EBENVIRONMENT DESIGN
We start with an empty website that is gradually populated by new pages and links between them.
Given that we represent pages by their DOM, we focus on creating DOM trees and assume links
between pages are implicitly deﬁned by events attached to certain elements.
While the most general approach to designing DOM trees would be combining a set of arbitrary
elements in a bottom-up approach, this would generate a large number of malformed websites that
are semantically incoherent. Consider the second page in Figure 3 where there is a text box and
4
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
W ebsite 
Page 2 
 Page 1 
Obs 2 1 USERNAME 2 FIRSTNAME 1 LOGIN Adversary Rendering 
f L f P f L f P f L f P f K 
f 0 
f I f I LSTM LSTM LSTM 
Figure 3: A sample rollout of the adversary for compositional environment generation for web navigation
problem. An initial observation (Obs) is given at the beginning of the rollout. f0,fK,fL,fP, and fIdenote
networks for encoding initial observation, generating number of pages, page indices,1primitives, and encoding
LSTM inputs, respectively.
a label on the top that says “First Name”. Now, if we have had inserted the label on top of the
‘Username’ text box in the ﬁrst page, the website would become malformed as it is ambiguous if
the text box refers to ‘username’ or ‘ﬁrst name’.
As a result, we formulate the website design as combining a set of primitive DOM sub-trees that are
general enough to create complex websites but can be combined safely in a tree structure. We ﬁrst
create a set of underspeciﬁed DOM tree templates where certain elements and attributes are replaced
with variables. By assigning values to variables in a template, a fully speciﬁed DOM tree primitive
is generated that can be combined with other primitives to create a new web page. The order in
which the primitives are combined also deﬁnes how the web page will be rendered as well.
Figure 2 illustrates an example underspeciﬁed DOM tree template and its instantiations with differ-
ent variable assignments. We create an input template (Figure 2b) as a variable label and text box
with a common parent. In Figure 2a, we pick the label element and assign a value to its text attribute
while in Figure 2c, we assign a value to the inner text of the text box and ignore the label element.
4.1 W EBSITE DESIGN PRIMITIVES
We introduce a new framework called gMiniWoB for automated website generation, which im-
plements 40 different design primitives from 11 different underspeciﬁed DOM templates. These
primitives are widely used across the web and include ‘navigation bars’, ‘product carousels’, ‘item
decks’, ‘web forms’, ‘item carts’, ‘dropdowns’, etc. Every primitive includes at least one actionable
element that changes the DOM structure when the agent interacts with it. Each primitive is classi-
ﬁed into 2 different categories based on their use in the reward computation: (i) Active primitives
(used) , and (ii) Passive primitives (not used) .26of the 40different primitives are active primitives
and the rest are passive. When a new active primitive is added to a web page, it automatically also
grows the instruction to accommodate the corresponding ﬁeld. For example, adding ‘First Name’
text box in Figure 2c also adds a new ﬁeld with “ﬁrstname” key into user instruction. This makes
active primitives more complicated to learn than passive primitives, which mostly serve as noise.
However, real websites contain many distracting elements (passive primitives), so it is important for
agents to learn to ignore them. Appendix A.3 details all the design primitives used, and Appendix
A.4 shows the websites in the testset.
4.2 A DVERSARY ARCHITECTURE
We propose an autoregressive adversary policy for the compositional environment generation prob-
lem where the goal is to place a set of design primitives to a set of locations. We parametrize the
1For simplicity of illustration, we show an example generation process where primitives are generated in an
increasing order of the page indices; however, in our formulation (see Section 4.2 for details), the page indices
corresponding to consecutive LSTM timesteps do not necessarily increase monotonically.
5
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
adversary with a policy E(aAjoA)such that
E(aAjoA) =(kjK)NY
i=0(aija0i 1;b0i 1;k)(bija0i 1;b0i 1;k) (2)
whereNis an upper limit on the number of outputs, Kis an upper limit on the number of locations,
aiis a design primitive, biis a location index, and oAis an initial observation. The adversary
ﬁrst samples the number of locations kfrom a parametrized Categorical distribution Cat(0;K).
Conditioned on oA, it executes an autoregressive model to generate a set of primitives and their
corresponding locations within [0;;k].
We sample oAfrom the standard normal distribution, similar to generative adversarial networks
(GAN), to allow the adversary to diversify its design distribution. This observation is encoded
with a feed forward network h0=f0(oA)andh0is passed to another network fKthat outputs a
distribution over number of empty pages. The same hidden state h0is passed to an LSTM network
as the initial input vector and output of the LSTM is used by two independent networks fPandfLto
(i) learn a distribution over design primitives and (ii) learn a distribution over locations, respectively.
We sample a primitive and a location from these distributions and they are encoded by another
networkfIinto a hidden state which is used as the input to the LSTM at the next step. After running
forNsteps, sampled design actions are sent to a renderer module which generates the environment.
For the web navigation problem, Kdenotes the number of pages in the website, locations ( bi)
denote pages, and primitives ( ai) denote DOM tree primitives. We illustrate a sample rollout of
the adversary for web environment generation in Figure 3. We also augment the primitive design
actions with a special SKIP action that does nothing when executed by the renderer. This allows
the adversary to control the number of primitives added.
4.3 F LEXIBLE PAIRED
We use ﬂexible antagonist selection to improve on the regret objective of Eq. 1. We initialize two
agentsAandP. At each iteration, the adversary designs a new website and each agent collects a
trajectory with return Rby navigating the website and the regret is:
REGRET = maxfRA;RPg 0:5(RA+RP) (3)
This objective does not make a distinction between antagonist and protagonist agents, and instead
annotates the best performing agent as the antagonist. As long as any agent has a higher performance
than the other agent, the objective will continue to improve the weakest agent. During that time, the
other agent in the policy continues learning, and therefore provide a stronger maximum performance
against which we measure the regret. The Flexible PAIRED algorithm we propose is shown below.
Using policy gradient updates, we train each agent in the population to optimize environmental
reward, and the adversary to maximize the regret as computed in Eq. 3.
Algorithm 1 One step training of ﬂexible PAIRED
1:Input:A;P : Initialize two agents independently
2:W  Run the adversary Eto generate a new website
3:RA,RP  Run agentAandPin the environment Wand collect rewards
4:REGRET  Compute regret as in Eq. 3
5:Update adversary parameters using REGRET as the reward
6:Update parameters of AandPusingRAandRP, respectively
4.4 B UDGET ENFORCING ON ADVERSARY
Consider the following scenario where agents are placed on the home page of a shopping web-
site where there are many possible elements, but only a single button that takes them to their ac-
count page. During exploration, agents mostly collect negative rewards for taking incorrect actions,
bounded to a very narrow interval (as there is only a single optimal action). In this case, the regret is
very small and non-informative, which hinders the adversary’s ability to design environments at an
appropriate difﬁculty for agents to learn. This is true even with the proposed ﬂexible regret objective.
6
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
To mitigate this problem, we use a budget enforcing objective in addition to the regret that binds
the adversary’s design budget to the performance of the best agent. We approximate the effective
budget of the adversary as the expected number of non-SKIP actions over Ntime steps and update
this budget according to whether the agents are learning. More formally, we use the following
minimization objective for budget enforcing that is added to the PAIRED objective:
Obudget =RANX
i=1log(ai=SKIPja0i 1;b0;;i 1) (4)
whereRAis the reward of the antagonist (or the best-performing) agent. This objective encourages
the adversary to use less budget (more SKIP actions) when the agents are not yet learning (i.e., RA
is negative or low); it encourages the adversary to use more budget (less SKIP actions) when the
navigator agents are collecting positive rewards in the environment.
5 E XPERIMENTS AND METHODS
We evaluate our models on a variety of web environments implemented in MiniWoB framework (Shi
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018). We implemented several challenging websites with varying difﬁculty
levels using the same set of design primitives. These environments include ‘Login’, ‘Enter Address’,
‘Flight Booking’, ‘Enter Payment’, and ‘Shopping’ websites, where the agents need to enter text or
select information in the website while navigating between pages. Each environment comes with
4 different difﬁculty levels by gradually adding more primitives to websites. These environments
are never explicitly presented to agents during training, so performance in them measures how well
agents can generalize to unseen websites at test time.
Agent architecture: Following Gur et al. (2019), we utilize an LSTM based DOM tree encoder
and a feed forward network to encode proﬁle ﬁelds. The navigator agent policy outputs a joint
distribution over elements and ﬁelds by measuring pairwise similarities between element encodings
and proﬁle ﬁelds. We compute the state-value by using the marginal distribution of elements as
attention weights over element encodings and passing the context vector through a FF network. Web
navigation agents are trained with an actor-critic algorithm (Liu et al., 2018). We train the LSTM-
based adversary network using Flexible PAIRED and Flexible b-PAIRED with policy gradient.
Baselines: We benchmark PAIRED, Flexible PAIRED, and Flexible b-PAIRED against two addi-
tional baselines. First, a Domain Randomization (DR) agent, which we implement using a similar
approach as Dennis et al. (2020). We ﬁrst sample the number of empty pages kfrom a uniform dis-
tributionU[0;K]. Next, we randomly sample a primitive (including SKIP), and a page from U[0;k]
forNsteps. Second, a Curriculum Learning (CL) approach, which adapts the scheduled curriculum
idea of Gur et al. (2019) to zero-shot environment generation where we are not given a speciﬁc web-
site but a set of design primitives. We randomly sample each primitive w.r.t. a probability pwherep
is initialized with a small number and scheduled to reach 1:0during training.
6 R ESULTS
We ﬁrst compare the original PAIRED algorithm (which used separate antagonist and protagonist
agents) to the proposed Flexible PAIRED algorithm that annotates the best performing agent as
the antagonist. Flexible PAIRED considerably improves upon PAIRED, which fails to learn in this
environment (Figure 4). One reason is that when agents are separate and have very similar re-
wards, especially early during training, the regret becomes very small. This uninformative signal
makes it difﬁcult for the adversary to learn. On the other hand, Flexible PAIRED computes a con-
sistently positive regret signal, which more clearly indicates to the adversary which environments
are challenging, but still feasible. The further ablation studies show that adding budget improves
performance for both ﬂexible, and original PAIRED method.
Comparison on test environments: We evaluate the performance of the proposed models and base-
lines on task success rate computed across test environments with different difﬁculty levels. Flexi-
ble b-PAIRED outperforms Flexible PAIRED indicating the budget objective signiﬁcantly improves
performance (Figure 5). Further, both techniques signiﬁcantly outperform the baseline models on
all tasks, with Flexible b-PAIRED effectively reaching more than 80% task success on difﬁculty 1
7
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
(a) Login
 (b) Address
 (c) Payment
(d) Shopping
 (e) Flight booking
 (f) Primitives
Figure 4: Comparison of PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020) and Flexible PAIRED with and without budget en-
forcing; averaged over 4 difﬁculty levels. (f): Percentage of active primitives over training steps.
(a) Difﬁculty level 1
 (b) Difﬁculty level 2
 (c) Difﬁculty level 3
 (d) Difﬁculty level 4
Figure 5: Aggregated task success rate comparison of Flexible b-PAIRED and baseline models on test envi-
ronments with increasing difﬁculty levels. See Appendix A.2 for detailed results.
tasks. Even as the complexity of the environments continues to increase (see Section 6), Flexible
b-PAIRED agents still perform consistently well without degrading performance. While CL out-
performs Flexible PAIRED early in the training, its performance drops signiﬁcantly due to ignoring
agents’ skill level, and making environments that are too challenging for agents to complete. We
also observe that Flexible b-PAIRED learns faster than Flexible PAIRED on all environments as
Flexible b-PAIRED reacts to agents’ performance faster than Flexible PAIRED (see Appendix A.2).
Environments complexity: While agent performance improves over time, we would like to know if
they are presented with more challenging environments over training. We estimate the percentage of
active primitives generated as a measure of environment complexity. Learning a web page with more
passive primitives is a relatively easier task than a page with more active primitives, because passive
primitives either add noise and should ignored by the agents, or are used by agents only to navigate
to another page. On the other hand, if there are more active primitives, not only will the size of
the DOM tree increase but the number of proﬁle ﬁelds will increase, making the matching between
elements and proﬁle more challenging. Flexible b-PAIRED starts around 60% random selection
of primitives, and gradually generates more active primitives (Figure 4f). Although presented with
more active primitives by Flexible b-PAIRED, agents are still able to improve thanks to Flexible
b-PAIRED’s ability to accurately tune the difﬁculty of the environments according to agents’ skill.
We also observe that the distribution of the primitives shifts later in the training to more complex
and relevant primitives (see Appendix A.1).
7 C ONCLUSION
This work presents a novel technique for Adversarial Environment Generation (AEG), which we
show improves signiﬁcantly over prior work. In addition, we apply AEG to the problem of web
navigation, and provide an open-source environment that enables learning to design complex web-
sites out of a set of compositional primitives. Our Flexible b-PAIRED method is able to generate a
curriculum of increasingly complicated websites, and successfully trains agents which can navigate
challenging, high-dimensional websites.
8
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
REFERENCES
Andres Campero, Roberta Raileanu, Heinrich K ¨uttler, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tim Rockt ¨aschel,
and Edward Grefenstette. Learning with amigo: Adversarially motivated intrinsic goals. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.12122 , 2020.
Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch,
and Sergey Levine. Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised environment
design. Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020.
Alex Graves, Marc G Bellemare, Jacob Menick, Remi Munos, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Automated
curriculum learning for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03003 , 2017.
Izzeddin Gur, Uli Rueckert, Aleksandra Faust, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Learning to navigate the
web. In ICLR , 2019.
Nick Jakobi. Evolutionary robotics and the radical envelope-of-noise hypothesis. Adaptive behavior ,
6(2):325–368, 1997.
Joel Z Leibo, Edward Hughes, Marc Lanctot, and Thore Graepel. Autocurricula and the emergence
of innovation from social interaction: A manifesto for multi-agent intelligence research. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1903.00742 , 2019.
Evan Zheran Liu, Kelvin Guu, Panupong Pasupat, Tianlin Shi, and Percy Liang. Reinforcement
learning on web interfaces using workﬂow-guided exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08802 ,
2018.
Tambet Matiisen, Avital Oliver, Taco Cohen, and John Schulman. Teacher-student curriculum learn-
ing. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 2019.
Eric Mazumdar, Lillian J Ratliff, Michael I Jordan, and S Shankar Sastry. Policy-gradient algorithms
have no guarantees of convergence in continuous action and state multi-agent settings. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.03712 , 2019a.
Eric V Mazumdar, Michael I Jordan, and S Shankar Sastry. On ﬁnding local nash equilibria (and
only local nash equilibria) in zero-sum games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.00838 , 2019b.
R´emy Portelas, C ´edric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teacher algorithms for
curriculum learning of deep rl in continuously parameterized environments. In Conference on
Robot Learning , pp. 835–853. PMLR, 2020.
Fereshteh Sadeghi and Sergey Levine. Cad2rl: Real single-image ﬂight without a single real image.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04201 , 2016.
Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of bits: An
open-domain platform for web-based agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
pp. 3135–3144, 2017.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Zeming Lin, Ilya Kostrikov, Gabriel Synnaeve, Arthur Szlam, and Rob
Fergus. Intrinsic motivation and automatic curricula via asymmetric self-play. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.05407 , 2017.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Do-
main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) , pp. 23–30.
IEEE, 2017.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O Stanley. Paired open-ended trailblazer (poet):
Endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01753 , 2019.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Aditya Rawal, Jiale Zhi, Yulun Li, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O Stanley.
Enhanced poet: Open-ended reinforcement learning through unbounded invention of learning
challenges and their solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08536 , 2020.
9
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
difﬁculty level = 1 difﬁculty level = 2 difﬁculty level = 3 difﬁculty level = 4Login
 Enter Address
 Enter Payment
 Shopping
 Flight Booking
Table 1: Task success rate comparison of PAIRED and baseline models on test environments with
increasing difﬁculty levels. From left to right, columns correspond to increasing difﬁculty. From top
to bottom, rows correspond to different test environments.
A A PPENDIX
A.1 D ISTRIBUTION OF PRIMITIVES DURING TRAINING
During training, the distribution of primitives become more skewed towards active primitives (as
shown in Figure 4f), but as the environments get more challenging, new primitives are slowly intro-
duced as well (Figure 6). What we observe from the histograms in Figure 6 is that new primitives
are slowly introduced between middle and late snapshots while the ranking of the primitives is also
slightly changed. For example, the adversary prefers ’departureairport’ primitive more than ’full-
name’ primitive in the late snapshot of the training.
A.2 D ETAILED RESULTS ON TESTENVIRONMENTS
We detail the aggregated results in Figure 5 and present performance of agents across tasks and
difﬁculty levels (Figure 1). On the easiest level of tasks, CL achieves slightly lower performance
than Flexible b-PAIRED early in the training while as the task difﬁculty increases, the gap becomes
more apparent. We observe that the primitive distribution in Figure 6c and task success rate results
are consistent in which late in the training, the adversary focuses more on the ’Flight Booking’
related primitives and its performance still strongly increases.
10
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
(a) Early
(b) Middle
(c) Late
Figure 6: Histograms of primitives from early, middle, and late snapshots of the training.
11
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
A.3 W EBENVIRONMENT DESIGN PRIMITIVES
Design Primitives and Their Descriptions
Design Primitive Design Template Active/Passive Description
addressline1 input active Main address information
addressline2 input active Secondary address information
cabin multi-selection active Multiple cabin options
captcha input active Captcha information
carousel carousel passive Items with images in a carousel
with previous and next buttons
cart cart passive Items in a product cart with promo
code information
cc multi-selection active Multiple credit card type options
cccvv input active Credit card CVV information
ccexpdate input active Credit card expiration date informa-
tion
ccnumber input active Credit card number information
city input active City address information
dealmedia media passive Product media with image, label,
and link
deck deck passive Multiple product decks with image,
label, and link
departureairport input active Departure airport information
departuredate input active Departure date information
destinationairport input active Destination airport information
destinationdate input active Destination date information
ﬁrstname input active First name information
ﬂighttype multi-selection active Multiple ﬂight type options
footer1 footer passive Footer with links and information
forgotpassword link passive Link with forgot password context
forgotusername link passive Link with forgot username context
fullname input active First and last name information
header label passive Generic header
header login label passive Header for login form
header select items label passive Header for item selection
inpgroup1 input passive Generic input with default search
context
lastname input active Last name information
navbar navigation bar passive A navigation bar with a menu
next checkout button passive Next button with checkout context
next login button passive Next button with login context
next login page button passive Next button with login context
numberofpeople multi-selection active Multiple number of people options
password input active Password information
rememberme selection active Checkbox with remember me con-
text
state input active State information
stayloggedin selection active Checkbox with stay logged in con-
text
submit button passive Submit button
username input active Username information
zipcode input active Zipcode information
In Table A.3, we present the list of design primitives, corresponding templates, types, and descrip-
tions.
12
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
(a) Login
 (b) Enter Address
 (c) Enter Payment
 (d) Flight Booking
Figure 7: Screenshots of single page test environments.
A.4 L IST OF TESTENVIRONMENTS
In Figure 7 and 8, we present screenshots of the testing environments with the hardest difﬁculty
levels. While “Login”, “Enter Address”, “Enter Payment”, and “Flight Booking” are single page
environments, “Shopping” is a multi-page environment where an agent needs to ﬁrst navigate the
home page and then solve “Login” and “Enter Address” tasks.
13
Presented at Deep RL Workshop, NeurIPS 2020
(a) Home Page
 (b) Login Page
 (c) Address Page
Figure 8: Screenshots of multi-page “Shopping” environment. The “Shopping” environment is
composed of a complex home page and additional “Login” and “Enter Address” pages.
14