Title: Enhancing the Transformer with Explicit Relational Encoding for Math Problem Solving

Enhancing the Transformer With Explicit Relational
Encoding for Math Problem Solving
Imanol Schlag1, Paul Smolensky2;3, Roland Fernandez2, Nebojsa Jojic2,
J¨urgen Schmidhuber1, Jianfeng Gao2
1The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA / USI / SUPSI,
2Microsoft Research, Redmond,
3Johns Hopkins University
fimanol,juergeng@idsia.ch
fpsmo,rfernand,jojic,jfgao g@microsoft.com
Abstract
We incorporate Tensor-Product Representa-
tions within the Transformer in order to better
support the explicit representation of relation
structure. Our Tensor-Product Transformer
(TP-Transformer) sets a new state of the art on
the recently-introduced Mathematics Dataset
containing 56 categories of free-form math
word-problems. The essential component of
the model is a novel attention mechanism,
called TP-Attention, which explicitly encodes
the relations between each Transformer cell
and the other cells from which values have
been retrieved by attention. TP-Attention
goes beyond linear combination of retrieved
values, strengthening representation-building
and resolving ambiguities introduced by
multiple layers of standard attention. The
TP-Transformer’s attention maps give better
insights into how it is capable of solving the
Mathematics Dataset’s challenging problems.
Pretrained models and code are available
online1.
1 Introduction
In this paper we propose a variation of the
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) that is designed
to allow it to better incorporate structure into its
representations. We test the proposal on a task
where structured representations are expected to be
particularly helpful: math word-problem solving,
where, among other things, correctly parsing
expressions and compositionally evaluating them
is crucial. Given as input a free-form math
question in the form of a character sequence like
Let r(g) be the second derivative
of 2 *g**3/3 - 21 *g**2/2 + 10 *g.
Let z be r(7). Factor -z *s + 6 -
9*s**2 + 0 *s + 6 *s**2., the model must
Work partially done while at Microsoft Research.
1github.com/ischlag/TP-Transformerproduce an answer matching the speciﬁed target
character-sequence -(s + 3) *(3*s - 2)
exactly. Our proposed model is trained end-to-end
and infers the correct answer for novel examples
without any task-speciﬁc structural biases.
We begin by viewing the Transformer as a kind
of Graph Neural Network (e.g., Gori et al., 2005;
Goller and K ¨uchler, 1995; Battaglia et al., 2018).
For concreteness, consider the encoder component
of a Transformer with Hheads. When the hthhead
of a celltof layerlissues a query and as a result
concentrates its self-attention distribution on an-
other cellt0in layerl, we can view these two cells
as joined by an edge in an information-ﬂow graph:
the information content at t0in effect passes via this
edge to affect the state of t. The strength of this
attention can be viewed as a weight on this edge,
and the index hof the head can be viewed as a label.
Thus, each layer of the Transformer can be viewed
as a complete, directed, weighted, labeled graph.
Prior NLP work has interpreted certain edges of
these graphs in terms of linguistic relations (Sec. 8),
and we wish to enrich the relation structure of these
graphs to better support the explicit representation
of relations within the Transformer.
Here we propose to replace each of the dis-
crete edge labels 1;:::;H , with a relation vec-
tor: we create a bona ﬁde representational space
for the relations being learned by the Transformer.
This makes it possible for the hidden representa-
tion at each cell to approximate the vector embed-
ding of a symbolic structure built from the rela-
tions generated by that cell. This embedding is a
Tensor-Product Representation (TPR ; Smolen-
sky, 1990) in an end-to-end-differentiable TPR sys-
tem (Schlag and Schmidhuber, 2018; Schmidhu-
ber, 1993) that learns “internal spotlights of atten-
tion” (Schmidhuber, 1993). TPRs provide a general
method for embedding symbol structures in vector
spaces. TPRs support compositional processingarXiv:1910.06611v2  [cs.LG]  4 Nov 2020
by directly encoding constituent structure: the rep-
resentation of a structure is the sum of the repre-
sentation of its constituents. The representation of
each constituent is built compositionally from two
vectors: one vector that embeds the content of the
constituent, the ‘ﬁller’ — here, the vector returned
by attention — and a second vector that embeds
the structural role it ﬁlls — here, a relation con-
ceptually labeling an edge of the attention graph.
The vector that embeds a ﬁller and the vector that
embeds the role it ﬁlls are bound together by the
tensor product to form the tensor that embeds the
constituent that they together deﬁne.2The relations
here, and the structures they deﬁne, are learned un-
supervised by the Transformer in service of a task;
post-hoc analysis is then required to interpret those
roles.
In the new model, the TP-Transformer , each
head of each cell generates a key-, value- and query-
vector, as in the Transformer, but additionally gen-
erates a role-vector (which we refer to in some
contexts as a ‘relation vector’). The query is inter-
preted as seeking the appropriate ﬁller for that role
(or equivalently, the appropriate string-location for
fulﬁlling that relation). Each head binds that ﬁller
to its role via the tensor product (or some contrac-
tion of it), and these ﬁller/role bindings are summed
to form the TPR of a structure with Hconstituents
(details in Sec. 2).
An interpretation of an actual learned relation
illustrates this (see Fig. 3 in Sec. 5.2). One head
of our trained model can be interpreted as partially
encoding the relation second-argument-of . The top-
layer cell dominating an input digit seeks the oper-
ator of which the digit is in the second-argument
role. That cell generates a vector rtsignifying this
relation, and retrieves a value vector vt0describing
the operator from position t0that stands in this re-
lation. The result of this head’s attention is then
the binding of ﬁller vt0to role rt; this binding is
added to the bindings resulting from the cell’s other
attention heads.
On the Mathematics Dataset (Sec. 3), the new
model sets a new state of the art for the overall
accuracy (Sec. 4). Initial results of interpreting the
learned roles for the arithmetic-problem module
show that they include a good approximation to
2The tensor product operation (when the role-embedding
vectors are linearly independent) enables the sum of con-
stituents representing the structure as a whole to be uniquely
decomposable back into individual pairs of roles and their
ﬁllers, if necessary.the second-argument role of the division operator
and that they distinguish between numbers in the
numerator and denominator roles (Sec. 5).
More generally, it is shown that Multi-Head At-
tention layers not only capture a subspace of the
attended cell but capture nearly the full information
content (Sec. 6.1). An argument is provided that
multiple layers of standard attention suffer from the
binding problem, and it is shown theoretically how
the proposed TP-Attention avoids such ambiguity
(Sec. 6.2). The paper closes with a discussion of
related work (Sec. 8) and a conclusion (Sec. 9).
2 The TP-Transformer
The TP-Transformer’s encoder network, like the
Transformer’s encoder (Vaswani et al., 2017), can
be described as a 2-dimensional lattice of cells (t;l)
wheret= 1;:::;T are the sequence elements of
the input and l= 1;:::;L are the layer indices with
l= 0as the embedding layer. All cells share the
same topology and the cells of the same layer share
the same weights. More speciﬁcally, each cell con-
sists of an initial layer normalization (LN) followed
by a TP-Multi-Head Attention (TPMHA) sub-
layer followed by a fully-connected feed-forward
(FF) sub-layer. Each sub-layer is followed by layer
normalization (LN) and by a residual connection
(as in the original Transformer). Our cell struc-
ture follows directly from the ofﬁcial TensorFlow
source code by (Vaswani et al., 2017) but with regu-
lar Multi-Head Attention replaced by our TPMHA
layer.
2.1 TP-Multi-Head Attention
The TPMHA layer of the encoder consists of H
heads that can be applied in parallel. Every head
h;1hHapplies separate afﬁne transforma-
tionsWh;(k)
l;Wh;(v)
l;Wh;(q)
l;Wh;(r)
l2Rdkdz,
bh;(k)
l;bh;(v)
l;bh;(q)
l;bh;(r)
l2Rdkto produce key,
value, query, and relation vectors from the hidden
statezt;l, wheredk=dz=H:
kh
t;l=Wh;(k)
lzt;l+bh;(k)
l
vh
t;l=Wh;(v)
lzt;l+bh;(v)
l
qh
t;l=Wh;(q)
lzt;l+bh;(q)
l
rh
t;l=Wh;(r)
lzt;l+bh;(r)
l(1)
The ﬁller of the attention head t;l;h is
vh
t;l=TX
i=1vh
i;lh;i
t;l; (2)
i.e., a weighted sum of all Tvalues of the same
layer and attention head (see Fig. 1). Here h;i
t;l2
(0;1)is a continuous degree of match given by
the softmax of the dot product between the query
vector at position tand the key vector at position i:
h;i
t;l=exp(qh
t;lkh
i;l1pdk)
PT
i0=1exp(qh
t;lkh
i0;l1pdk)(3)
The scale factor1pdkcan be motivated as a
variance-reducing factor under the assumption that
the elements of qh
t;landkh
t;lare uncorrelated vari-
ables with mean 0 and variance 1, in order to ini-
tially keep the values of the softmax in a region
with better gradients (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Finally, we bind the ﬁller vh
t;lwith our relation
vector rh
t;l, followed by an afﬁne transformation
W(o)
h;l2Rdzdk;b(o)
h;l2Rdzbefore it is summed
up with the other heads’ bindings to form the TPR
of a structure with Hconstituents: this is the output
of the TPMHA layer.
TPMHA( zt;l;z1:T;l)
=X
hh
W(o)
h;l(vh
t;lrh
t;l) +b(o)
h;li
(4)
Note that, in this binding, to control dimension-
ality, we use a contraction of the tensor product,
pointwise multiplication : this is the diagonal
of the tensor product. For discussion, see the Ap-
pendix.
Figure 1: A simpliﬁed illustration of our TP-Attention
mechanism for one head at position tin layerl. The
main difference from standard Attention is the addi-
tional role representation that is element-wise multi-
plied with the ﬁller/value representation.
It is worth noting that the lthTPMHA layer re-
turns a vector that is quadratic in the inputs zt;l
to the layer: the vectors vh
i;lthat are linearly com-
bined to form vh
t;l(Eq. 2), and rh
t;l, are both linearin thezi;l(Eq. 1), and they are multiplied together
to form the output of TPMHA (Eq. 4). This means
that, unlike regular attention, TPMHA can increase,
over successive layers, the polynomial degree of
its representations as a function of the original in-
put to the Transformer. Although it is true that the
feed-forward layer following attention (Sec. 2.2)
introduces its own non-linearity even in the stan-
dard Transformer, in the TP-Transformer the at-
tention mechanism itself goes beyond mere linear
re-combination of vectors from the previous layer.
This provides further potential for the construction
of increasingly abstract representations in higher
layers.
2.2 Feed-Forward Layer
The feed-forward layer of a cell consists of an afﬁne
transformation followed by a ReLU activation and
a second afﬁne transformation:
FF(x) =W(g)
lReLU( W(f)
lx+b(f)
l)+b(g)
l(5)
Here, W(f)
l2Rdfdz;b(f)
l2Rdf;W(g)
l2
Rdzdf;b(g)
l2Rdzandxis the function’s argu-
ment. As in previous work, we set df= 4dz.
2.3 The Decoder Network
The decoder network is a separate network with
a similar structure to the encoder that takes the
hidden states of the encoder and auto-regressively
generates the output sequence. In contrast to the
encoder network, the cells of the decoder contain
two TPMHA layers and one feed-forward layer.
We designed our decoder network analogously to
(Vaswani et al., 2017) where the ﬁrst attention layer
attends over the masked decoder states while the
second attention layer attends over the ﬁnal en-
coder states. During training, the decoder network
receives the shifted targets (teacher-forcing) while
during inference we use the previous symbol with
highest probability (greedy-decoding). The ﬁnal
symbol probability distribution is given by
^y^t= softmax( ET^z^t;L) (6)
where ^z^t;Lis the hidden state of the last layer of
the decoder at decoding step ^tof the output se-
quence and Eis the shared symbol embedding of
the encoder and decoder.
3 The Mathematics Dataset
The Mathematics Dataset (Saxton et al., 2019) is a
large collection of math problems of various types,
including algebra, arithmetic, calculus, numerical
comparison, measurement, numerical factorization,
and probability. Its main goal is to investigate the
capability of neural networks to reason formally.
Each problem is structured as a character-level
sequence-to-sequence problem. The input se-
quence is a free-form math question or command
like What is the first derivative
of 13 *a**2 - 627434 *a + 11914106?
from which our model correctly predicts the
target sequence 26*a - 627434 . Another
example from a different module is Calculate
66.6 *12.14. which has 808.524 as its target
sequence.
The dataset is structured into 56 modules which
cover a broad spectrum of mathematics up to uni-
versity level. It is procedurally generated and
comes with 2 million pre-generated training sam-
ples per module. The authors provide an interpo-
lation dataset for every module, as well as a few
extrapolation datasets as an additional measure of
algebraic generalization.
We merge the different training splits train-easy ,
train-medium , and train-hard from all modules
into one big training dataset of 120 million unique
samples. From this dataset we extract a character-
level vocabulary of 72 symbols, including start-of-
sentence ,end-of-sentence , and padding symbols3.
4 Experimental Results
We evaluate our trained model on the concatenated
interpolation and extrapolation datasets of the
pre-generated ﬁles, achieving a new state of the
art (see Table 1). A more detailed comparison of
the interpolation and extrapolation performance
for every module separately can be found in the
supplementary material. Throughout 1.0 million
training steps, the interpolation error on the
held-out data was strictly decreasing. We trained
on one machine with 8 P100 Nvidia GPUs for
10 days. Preliminary experiments of 2.0 million
training steps indicates that the interpolation
accuracy of the TP-Transformer can be further
improved to at least 84.24%.
4.1 Implementation Details
The TP-Transformer uses the same hyper-
parameters as the regular Transformer ( dz=
3Note that (Saxton et al., 2019) report a vocabulary size of
95, but this ﬁgure encompasses characters that never appear
in the pre-generated training and test data.512;df= 2048;H= 8;L= 6). Due to the use of
the TP-Attention this results in a larger number of
trainable weights. For this reason we also include
two hyper-parameter settings with fewer trainable
weights. TP-Transformer B shrinks the hidden-
state size and ﬁlter size from a multiple of 64 to
a multiple of 60 ( dz= 480;df= 1920 ) which
results in 1.2 million fewer trainable weights than
the baseline and the TP-Transformer C shrinks the
ﬁlter size more aggressively down to a total of 14.2
million trainable weights ( /tildelow32% fewer weights) by
massively reducing the ﬁlter size while keeping the
hidden state size the same ( dz= 512;df= 512 ).
We initialize the symbol embedding matrix E
fromN(0;1),W(p)fromN(1;1), and all other
matrices W()using the Xavier uniform initializa-
tion as introduced by (Glorot and Bengio, 2010).
We were not able to train the TP-Transformer, nor
the regular Transformer, using the learning rate
and gradient clipping scheme described by (Sax-
ton et al., 2019). Instead we proceed as follows:
The gradients are computed using PyTorch’s Au-
tograd engine and their gradient norm is clipped
at 0.1. The optimizer we use is also Adam, but
with a smaller learning rate= 110 4;beta1 =
0:9;beta2 = 0:995. We train with a batch size of
1024.
5 Interpreting the Learned Structure
We report initial results of analyzing the learned
structure of the encoder network’s last layer after
training the TP-Transformer for 700k steps.
5.1 Interpreting the Learned Roles
To this end, we sample 128 problems from the inter-
polation dataset of the arithmetic mixed module
and collect the role vectors from a randomly chosen
head. We use k-means with k= 20 to cluster the
role vectors from different samples and different
time steps of the ﬁnal layer of the encoder. Inter-
estingly, we ﬁnd separate clusters for digits in the
numerator and denominator of fractions. When
there is a fraction of fractions we can observe that
these assignments are placed such that the second
fraction reverses, arguably simplifying the division
of fractions into a multiplication of fractions (see
Fig. 2).
5.2 Interpreting the Attention Maps
In Fig. 3 we display three separate attention weight
vectors of one head of the last TP-Transformer
Weights Steps Train Interpolation Extrapolation
acc>95% acc >95%
LSTM with thinking steps (Saxton et al.) 18M 500k - 57.00% 6 41.00% 1
Transformer (Saxton et al.) 30M 500k - 76.00% 13 50.00% 1
Transformer (ours) 44.2M 1000k 86.60% 79.54% 16 53.28% 2
TP-Transformer (ours) 49.1M 1000k 89.01% 81.92% 18 54.67% 3
TP-Transformer B (ours) 43.0M 1000k 87.53% 80.52% 16 52.04% 1
TP-Transformer C (ours) 30.0M 1000k 86.33% 79.02% 14 54.71% 1
Table 1: Model accuracy averaged over all modules. A sample is correct if all characters of the target sequence have
been predicted correctly. The column “ >95%” counts how many of the 56 modules achieve over 95% accuracy.
TP-Transformer B and C differ from the standard hyper-parameters in order to reduce the total number of weights.
See section 4.1 for more details.
Figure 2: Samples of correctly processed problems from the arithmetic mixed module. ‘ #’ and ‘ %’ are the start-
and end-of-sentence symbols. The colored squares indicate the k-means cluster of the role-vector assigned by one
head in the ﬁnal layer in that position. Blue and gold rectangles respectively highlight numerator and denominator
roles. They were discovered manually. Note how their placement is correctly swapped in rows 2, 3, and 4, where a
number in the denominator of a denominator is treated as if in a numerator. Role-cluster 9 corresponds to the role
ones-digit-of-a-numerator-factor , and 6 to ones-digit-of-a-denominator-factor ; other such roles are also evident.
Figure 3: TP-Transformer attention maps for three examples as described in section 5.2.
layer of the encoder. Gold boxes are overlaid to
highlight most-relevant portions. The row above
the attention mask indicates the symbols that take
information to the symbol in the bottom row. In
each case, they take from ‘ /’. Seen most simply in
the ﬁrst example, this attention can be interpreted
as encoding a relation second-argument-to holding
between the querying digits and the ‘ /’ operator.
The second and third examples show that several
numerals in the denominator can participate in this
relation. The third display shows how a numerator-
numeral ( -297 ) intervening between twodenominator-numerals is skipped for this relation.
6 Deﬁcits of Multi-Head Attention
Layers
6.1 Multi-Head Attention Subspaces Capture
Virtually All Information
It was claimed by (Vaswani et al., 2017) that Multi-
head attention allows the model to jointly attend
to information from different representation sub-
spaces at different positions. In this section, we
show that in our trained models, an individual at-
tention head does not access merely a subset of the
information in the attended cell but instead captures
nearly the full information content.
Let us consider a toy example where the atten-
tion layer of cellt;lonly attends to cellt0;l. In this
setting, the post-attention representation simpliﬁes
and becomes
zt;l+W(o)
l(W(v)
lzt0;l+b(v)
l) +b(o)
l
=zt;l+o(v(zt0;l))(7)
whereoandvare the respective afﬁne maps (see
Sec. 2.1). Note that even though W(v)
lis a projec-
tion into an 8 times smaller vector space, it remains
to be seen whether the hidden state loses infor-
mation about zt0;l. We empirically test to what
extent the trained Transformer and TP-Transformer
lose information. To this end, we randomly select
n= 100 samples and extract the hidden state of
the last layer of the encoder zt;6, as well as the
value representation vh(zt;6)for every head. We
then train an afﬁne model to reconstruct zt;6from
vh(zt;6), the value vector of the single head h:
^zt;6=Whvh(zt;6) +bh
e=1
n(^zt;6 zt;6)2(8)
For both trained models, the TP-Transformer and
the regular Transformer, the mean squared error
eaveraged across all heads is only /tildelow0.017 and
/tildelow0.009 respectively. Note that, because of layer
normalization, the relevant quantities are scaled topdz. This indicates that the attention mechanism
incorporates not just a subspace of the states it at-
tends to, but afﬁne transformations of those states
that preserve nearly the full information content.
In such a case, the attention mechanism can be
interpreted as the routing of multiple local informa-
tion source into one global tree structure of local
representations.
6.2 The Binding Problem of Stacked
Attention Layers
Thebinding problem refers to the problem of bind-
ing features together into objects while keeping
them separated from other objects. It has been
studied in the context of theoretical neuroscience
(von der Malsburg, 1981, 1994) but also with re-
gards to connectionist machine learning models
(Hinton et al., 1984). The purpose of a binding
mechanism is to enable the fully distributed rep-
resentation of symbolic structure (like a hierarchyof features) which has recently resurfaced as an
important direction for neural network research
(Lake and Baroni, 2017; Bahdanau et al., 2018;
van Steenkiste et al., 2019; Palangi et al., 2017;
Tang et al., 2018).
In this section, we describe how the standard at-
tention mechanism is ill suited to capture complex
nested representations, and we provide an intuitive
understanding of the beneﬁt of our TP-Attention.
We understand the attention layer of a cell as the
means by which the subject (the cell state) queries
all other cells for an object . We then show how
a hierarchical representation of multiple queries
becomes ambiguous in multiple standard attention
layers.
Consider the string (a/b)/(c/d) . A good
neural representation captures the hierarchical
structure of the string such that it will not be con-
fused with the similar-looking but structurally dif-
ferent string (a/d)/(c/b) . Our TP-Attention
makes use of a binding mechanism in order to
explicitly support complex structural relations by
binding together the object representations receiv-
ing high attention with a subject-speciﬁc role rep-
resentation. Let us continue with a more techni-
cal example. Consider a simpliﬁed Transformer
network where every cell consists only of a single-
head attention layer with a residual connection: no
feed-forward layer or layer normalization, and let
us assume no bias terms in the maps olandvlin-
troduced in the previous section (Eq. 7). In this
setting, assume that cella;lonly attends to cellb;l,
andcellc;lonly attends to celld;lwherea;b;c;d are
distinct positions of the input sequence. In this case
za;l+1=za;l+ol(vl(zb;l))
zc;l+1=zc;l+ol(vl(zd;l))(9)
Suppose now that, for hierarchical grouping, the
next layer celle;l+1attends to both cella;l+1and
cellc;l+1(equally, each with attention weight1
2).
This results in the representation
ze;l+2=ze;l+1
+ol+1(vl+1(za;l+1+zc;l+1))=2
=ze;l+1
+ol+1(vl+1(za;l+zc;l
+ol(vl(zb;l)) +ol(vl(zd;l))))=2(10)
Note that the ﬁnal representation is ambiguous
in the sense that it is unclear by looking only at
Eq. 10 whether cella;lhas picked cellb;lorcelld;l.
Either scenario would have led to the same out-
come, which means that the network would not
be able to distinguish between these two different
structures (as in confusing (a/b)/(c/d) with
(a/d)/(c/b) ). In order to resolve this ambi-
guity, the standard Transformer must recruit other
attention heads or ﬁnd suitable non-linear maps in
between attention layers, but it remains uncertain
how the network might achieve a clean separation.
Our TP-Attention mechanism, on the other hand,
speciﬁcally removes this ambiguity. Now Eqs. 9
and 10 become:
za;l+1=za;l+ol(vl(zb;l)ra;l)
zc;l+1=zc;l+ol(vl(zd;l)rc;l)
ze;l+2=ze;l+1+ol+1(vl+1(za;l+zc;l
+ol(vl(zb;l)ra;l)
+ol(vl(zd;l)rc;l)))=2(11)
Note that the ﬁnal representation is not ambiguous
anymore. Binding the ﬁller symbols vl(z)(our ob-
jects) with a subject-speciﬁc role representation r
as described in Eq. 4 breaks the structural symme-
try we had with regular attention. It is now simple
for the network to speciﬁcally distinguish the two
different structures.
7 Hadamard-Product Attention as an
Optimal Approximation of
Tensor-Product Attention
In Eq. 4 for TPMHA, we have a sum over all H
heads of an afﬁne-transformed product of a value
vector vhand a role vector rh. (Throughout this
discussion, we leave the subscripts t;limplicit, as
well as the over-bar on vhin Eq. 4.) In a hypothet-
ical, full-TPR formulation, this product would be
the tensor product vh
rh, although in our actual
proposed TP-Transformer, the Hadamard (elemen-
twise) product vhrh(the diagonal of vh
rh)
is used. The appropriateness of the compression
from tensor product to Hadamard product can be
seen as follows.
In the hypothetical full-TPR version of TPMHA,
attention would return the sum of Htensor prod-
ucts. This tensor Awould have rank at most H,
potentially enabling a substantial degree of com-
pression across all tensors the model will compute
over the data of interest. Given the translation-
invariance built into the Transformer via position-
invariant parameters, the same compression must
be applied in all positions within a given layer l,although the compression may vary across heads.
For the compression of Awe will need more than
Hcomponents, as this decomposition needs to be
optimal over all alltensors in that layer for alldata
points.
In detail, for each head h, the compression of the
tensor Ah=vh
rh(or matrix Ah=vhr>
h) is
to dimension dk, which will ultimately be mapped
to dimension dz(to enable addition with zvia the
residual connection) by the afﬁne transformation
of Eq. 4 . The optimal dk-dimensional compres-
sion for head hat layerlwould preserve the dk
dominant dimensions of variance of the attention-
generated states for that head and layer, across all
positions and inputs: a kind of singular-value de-
composition retaining those dimensions with the
principal singular values. Denote these principal
directions byfmh
c
nh
cjc= 1;:::;d kg, and let
MhandNhrespectively be the dkdkmatrices
with the orthonormal vectors fmh
cgandfnh
cgas
columns. (Note that orthonormality implies that
M>
hMh=IandN>
hNh=I, withIthedkdk
identity matrix.)
The compression of Ah,^Ah, will lie within
the space spanned by these dktensor products
mh
c
nh
c, i.e., ^Ah=Pdk
c=1~ah
cmc
nc; in ma-
trix form, ^Ah=Mh~AhN>
h, where ~Ahis the
dkdkdiagonal matrix with elements ~ah
c. Thus
thedkdimensionsf~ah
cgof the compressed matrix
^Ahthat approximates Ahare given by:
~Ah=M>
h^AhNh
M>
hAhNh
=M>
hvhr>
hNh
= (M>
hvh)(N>
hrh)>(12)
~ah
c=h
~Ahi
cc
[M>
hvh]c[N>
hrh]c
= [~vh~rh]c(13)
where ~vh=M>
hvh,~rh=N>
hrh. Now
from Eq. 1, vh=Wh;(v)z+bh;(v), so
~vh=M>
h(Wh;(v)z+bh;(v)). Thus by chang-
ing the parameters Wh;(v);bh;(v)tofWh;(v)=
M>
hWh;(v);~bh;(v)=M>
hbh;(v), and analo-
gously for the role parameters Wh;(r);bh;(r), we
convert our original hypothetical TPR attention
tensor Ahto its optimal dk-dimensional approxi-
mation, in which the tensor product of the origi-
nal vectors vh;rhis replaced by the Hadamard
product of the linearly-transformed vectors ~vh;~rh.
Therefore, in the proposed model, which deploys
the Hadamard product, learning simply needs to
converge to the parameters fWh;(v);~bh;(v)rather
than the parameters Wh;(v);bh;(v).
8 Related Work
Several recent studies have shown that the
Transformer-based language model BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018) captures linguistic relations such as
those expressed in dependency-parse trees. This
was shown for BERT’s hidden activation states (He-
witt and Manning, 2019; Tenney et al., 2019) and,
most directly related to the present work, for the
graph implicit in BERT’s attention weights (Co-
enen et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2019). Future work ap-
plying the TP-Transformer to language tasks (like
those on which BERT is trained) will enable us to
study the connection between the explicit relations
frh
t;lgthe TP-Transformer learns and the implicit
relations that have been extracted from BERT.
Multiplicative states have been used in neu-
ral networks before (Ivakhnenko and Lapa, 1965;
Ivakhnenko, 1971). The Hadamard-Product Atten-
tion bears similarity to neural network gates which
have been shown to be effective mechanism to rep-
resent complex states in recurrent models (Hochre-
iter and Schmidhuber, 1997) and feed-forward
models (Srivastava et al., 2015). Recent work
presents the Gated Transformer-XL model which
incorporates a gating layer after the Multi-Head At-
tention layer of the regular Transformer (Parisotto
et al., 2019). Unlike the regular Transformer, the
Gated Transformer-XL is shown to be stable in a
reinforcement learning domain while matching or
outperforming recurrent baselines. The main dif-
ference is that the TP-Attention binds the values
of different heads before summation whereas the
Gated Transformer-XL gates simply the output of
the attention-layer.
Very recent work proposes a Transformer varia-
tion which merges the self-attention layer and the
fully-connected layer into a new all-attention layer
(Sukhbaatar et al., 2019). To achieve this, the self-
attention layer is extended with keys and values
which are learned by gradient descent instead of
using neural network activations. The feed-forward
layers are then removed. Our binding-problem ar-
gument (Sec. 6.2) applies to this architecture even
more so than to the regular Transformer since there
are no non-linear maps in-between attention lay-ers that could possibly learn to resolve ambiguous
cases.
Previous work used Multi-Head Attention also
in recurrent neural networks in order to perform
complex relational reasoning (Santoro et al., 2018).
In their work, Multi-Head Attention is used to al-
low memories to interact with each other. They
demonstrate beneﬁts on program evaluation and
memorization tasks. Technically, the TP-Attention
is not limited to the Transformer architecture and
as such the beneﬁts could possibly carry over to any
connectionist model that makes use of Multi-Head
Attention.
9 Conclusion
We have introduced the TP-Transformer, which
enables the powerful Transformer architecture to
learn to explicitly encode structural relations using
Tensor-Product Representations. On the novel and
challenging Mathematics Dataset, TP-Transformer
beats the previously published state of the art and
our initial analysis of this model’s ﬁnal layer sug-
gests that the TP-Transformer naturally learns to
cluster symbol representations based on their struc-
tural position and relation to other symbols.
10 Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valu-
able comments. This research was supported by
an European Research Council Advanced Grant
(no: 742870).
References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Shikhar Murty, Michael
Noukhovitch, Thien Huu Nguyen, Harm de Vries,
and Aaron Courville. 2018. Systematic generaliza-
tion: What is required and can it be learned? arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.12889 .
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst,
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi, Ma-
teusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo,
Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al. 2018. Rela-
tional inductive biases, deep learning, and graph net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261 .
Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, Ann Yuan, Been Kim,
Adam Pearce, Fernanda Vi ´egas, and Martin Watten-
berg. 2019. Visualizing and measuring the geometry
of BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02715 .
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. 2010. Understand-
ing the difﬁculty of training deep feedforward neural
networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth interna-
tional conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statis-
tics, pages 249–256.
Christoph Goller and Andreas K ¨uchler. 1995. Learn-
ing Task-Dependent Distributed Representations by
Backpropagation Through Structure. AR-Report
AR-95-02, Institut f ¨ur Informatik, Technische Uni-
versit ¨at M ¨unchen.
Marco Gori, Gabriele Monfardini, and Franco Scarselli.
2005. A new model for learning in graph domains.
InProceedings of the IEEE International Joint Con-
ference on Neural Networks , volume 2, pages 729–
734. IEEE.
John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. 2019. A
structural probe for ﬁnding syntax in word represen-
tations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
4129–4138.
Geoffrey E Hinton, James L McClelland, David E
Rumelhart, et al. 1984. Distributed representations .
Carnegie-Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA.
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. 1997. Long Short-
Term Memory. Neural Computation , 9(8):1735–
1780.
Alekse ˘ı Grigor ˆE¹evich Ivakhnenko and
Valentin Grigor ´evich Lapa. 1965. Cybernetic
Predicting Devices . CCM Information Corporation.
Aleksey Grigorievitch Ivakhnenko. 1971. Polynomial
theory of complex systems. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics , (4):364–378.
Brenden M Lake and Marco Baroni. 2017. General-
ization without systematicity: On the compositional
skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00350 .
Yongjie Lin, Yi Chern Tan, and Robert Frank. 2019.
Open sesame: Getting inside BERT’s linguistic
knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01698 .
Christoph von der Malsburg. 1981. The correlation the-
ory of brain function (internal report 81-2). Goettin-
gen: Department of Neurobiology, Max Planck Inti-
tute for Biophysical Chemistry .
Christoph von der Malsburg. 1994. The correlation the-
ory of brain function. In E. Domany, J. L. van Hem-
men, and K. Schulten, editors, Models of neural net-
works II , pages 95–119. Springer, Berlin.
Hamid Palangi, Paul Smolensky, Xiaodong He, and
Li Deng. 2017. Deep learning of grammatically-
interpretable representations through question-
answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08432 .Emilio Parisotto, H Francis Song, Jack W Rae, Razvan
Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Siddhant M Jayakumar,
Max Jaderberg, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Aidan
Clark, Seb Noury, et al. 2019. Stabilizing trans-
formers for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.06764 .
Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, David Raposo, Jack
Rae, Mike Chrzanowski, Theophane Weber, Daan
Wierstra, Oriol Vinyals, Razvan Pascanu, and Timo-
thy Lillicrap. 2018. Relational recurrent neural net-
works. In Advances in neural information process-
ing systems , pages 7299–7310.
David Saxton, Edward Grefenstette, Felix Hill, and
Pushmeet Kohli. 2019. Analysing mathematical rea-
soning abilities of neural models. In International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Imanol Schlag and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. 2018. Learn-
ing to reason with third order tensor products. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS) , pages 9981–9993.
J. Schmidhuber. 1993. On decreasing the ratio between
learning complexity and number of time-varying
variables in fully recurrent nets. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks, Amsterdam , pages 460–463. Springer.
P. Smolensky. 1990. Tensor product variable binding
and the representation of symbolic structures in con-
nectionist systems. Artif. Intell. , 46(1-2):159–216.
Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Klaus Greff, and Juergen
Schmidhuber. 2015. Training very deep networks.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NIPS) . Preprint arXiv:1505.00387 [cs.LG],
May 2015.
Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Klaus Greff, and J ¨urgen Schmid-
huber. 2019. A perspective on objects and system-
atic generalization in model-based rl. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.01035 .
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Edouard Grave, Guillaume
Lample, Herve Jegou, and Armand Joulin. 2019.
Augmenting self-attention with persistent memory.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01470 .
Shuai Tang, Paul Smolensky, and Virginia R de Sa.
2018. Learning distributed representations of sym-
bolic structure using binding and unbinding opera-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12456 .
Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019.
BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.05950 .
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems , pages 5998–6008.
A General Considerations
In the version of the TP-Transformer studied in
this paper, binding of relations rto their values
vis not done by the tensor product, v
r, as in
full TPRs. Rather, a contraction of the full TPR
is used: the diagonal, which is the elementwise or
Hadamard product vr.4To what extent does
Hadamard-product binding share relevant proper-
ties with tensor-product binding?
A crucial property of the tensor product for its
use in vector representations of structure is that
a structure like a=bis not confusable with b=a,
unlike the frequently-used bag-of-words encoding:
in the BOW encoding of a=b, the pair of arguments
to the operator are encoded simply as a+b, where
aandbare respectively the vector encodings of
aandb. Obviously, this cannot be distinguished
from the BOW encoding of the argument pair in
b=a,b+a. (Hence the name, symbol “bag”, as
opposed to symbol “structure”.)
In a tensor-product representation of the argu-
ment pair in a=b, we have a?rn+b?rd, where rn
andrdare respectively distinct vector embeddings
of the numerator (or ﬁrst-argument) and denomina-
tor (or second-argument) roles, and ?is the tensor
product. This is distinct from a?rd+b?rn, the em-
bedding of the argument-pair in b=a. (In Sec. 6.2 of
the paper, an aspect of this general property, in the
context of attention models, is discussed. In Sec. 5,
visualization of the roles and the per-role-attention
show that this particular distinction, between the
numerator and denominator roles, is learned and
used by the trained TP-Transformer model.)
This crucial property of the tensor product, that
a?rn+b?rd6=a?rd+b?rn, is shared by the
Hadamard product: if we now take ?to represent
the Hadamard product, the inequality remains true.
To achieve this important property, the full tensor
product is not required: the Hadamard product is
the diagonal of the tensor product, which retains
much of the product structure of the tensor prod-
uct. In any application, it is an empirical question
how much of the full tensor product is required
to successfully encode distinctions between bind-
ings of symbols to roles; in the TP-Transformer, it
turns out that the diagonal of the tensor product is
sufﬁcient to get improvement in performance over
having no symbol-role-product structure at all. Un-
4This is a vector, and should not be confused with the inner
product vrwhich is a scalar: the inner product is the sum
of all the elements of the Hadamard product.fortunately, the compute requirements of training
on the Mathematics Dataset currently makes using
the full tensor product infeasible, unless the vector
representations of symbols and roles are reduced
to dimensions that proved to be too small for the
task. When future compute makes it possible, we
expect that expanding from the diagonal to the full
tensor product will provide further improvement in
performance and interpretability.
B Detailed Test Accuracy
Figure 4: Test accuracy on the interpolation test-set of the Mathematics dataset. TPT refers to the TP-Transformer
variations as introduced in section 4.1. TF refers to our implementation of the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Figure 5: Test accuracy on the extrapolation test-set of the Mathematics dataset. TPT refers to the TP-Transformer
variations as introduced in section 4.1. TF refers to our implementation of the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017).