Title: Investigating Failures of Automatic Translation in the Case of Unambiguous Gender

arXiv:2104.07838v1  [cs.CL]  16 Apr 2021Investigating Failures of Automatic Translation
in the Case of Unambiguous Gender
Adithya Renduchintala
Facebook AI
adirendu@fb.comAdina Williams
Facebook AI Research
adinawilliams@fb.com
Abstract
Transformer based models are the modern
work horses for neural machine translation
(NMT), reaching state of the art across several
benchmarks. Despite their impressive accu-
racy, we observe a systemic and rudimentary
class of errors made by transformer based
models with regards to translating from a
language that doesn’t mark gender on nouns
into others that do. We ﬁnd that even when the
surrounding context provides unambiguous
evidence of the appropriate grammatical
gender marking, no transformer based model
we tested was able to accurately gender occu-
pation nouns systematically. We release an
evaluation scheme and dataset for measuring
the ability of transformer based NMT models
to translate gender morphology correctly in
unambiguous contexts across syntactically
diverse sentences. Our dataset translates from
an English source into 20languages from
several different language families. With the
availability of this dataset, our hope is that the
NMT community can iterate on solutions for
this class of especially egregious errors.
1 Introduction
NMT models have come a long way since their
widespread adoption. Modern Transformer based
(Vaswani et al. ,2017 ) NMT architectures can
be trained on vast amounts of data, and are con-
stantly attaining higher BLEU scores on standard
benchmarks ( Barrault et al. ,2020 ). Despite this
impressive performance, we observed that state-of-
the-art Transformer-based MT systems are largely
unable to make basic deductions regarding how to
correctly inﬂect nouns with grammatical gender,
even when there is ample contextual evidence.
For example, we observe that they struggle inﬂect
occupation nouns like “doctor” with the correct
gender when translating sentences like “my mother
is a funny doctor”, despite there being no ambiguity
that “doctor” ought to be marked with feminine.This suggests that our current training paradigm (or
the architectures themselves), do not force models
to pay sufﬁcient attention to very basic linguistic
properties of a source sentence during inference.
When an NMT model makes mistakes like these,
it can degrade the trust a user places on translation
quality, or also reinforce representational harms in
the form of stereotypes ( Stanovsky et al. ,2019 ).
To more systematically explore translation fail-
ures for gender in unambiguous sentences, we have
created a benchmark dataset that clearly surfaces
these kinds of errors hoping that the wider NMT
community can devise better, targeted mitigation
strategies. Our benchmark contains specially con-
structed English source sentences which unambigu-
ously belie the gender of a person referred to with a
noun that can be inﬂected for multiple grammatical
genders. In our setting, we use sentences contain-
ing occupation nouns from English (which do not
bear grammatical gender marking in the source lan-
guage) and translate them into languages for which
occupation nouns must bear grammatical gender.
We craft unambiguous source sentences by
manipulating the context: In our dataset, an unam-
biguously gendered word—i.e., a noun (such as
father ) or pronoun (such as herself )—obligatorily
corefers with the occupation noun making it clear
what the gender on the occupation noun must be.
Consider “My nurse is a good father ”, “I am a nurse
who can inspire herself ”. Although all our occu-
pations nouns are technically underspeciﬁed (i.e.,
able to refer to any gender in the source language),
we also vary whether the occupation noun is stereo-
typically more likely to refer to a man or woman
(e.g., janitor vs.nurse ). Finally, we vary whether
the triggering word appears before or after the
occupation noun, to see if this affects performance:
compare “That janitor arrives early for hershift” to
“That herown child laughed surprised the janitor”.
To show the utility of our benchmark, we
evaluate the accuracy of the gender inﬂection in the
target language for several state-of-the art Trans-
fomer based NMT systems. Previous work focuses
primarily on ambiguous cases where the gender of
an occupation noun is genuinely under-determined
(Stanovsky et al. ,2019 ), since this allows for query-
ing the underlying (often stereotypical) “assump-
tions” of the translation model. We argue that our
unambiguous task is an even clearer explication of
the failures of NMT models, because in this set up,
morphological gender mistakes are not forgivable.
Because we expect existing MT systems to
struggle on our unambiguous task, we also devised
a somewhat simpler setting. It is well known that
translation systems perform better when provided
with more context (i.e., longer sentences; Tiede-
mann and Scherrer 2017 ;Miculicich et al. 2018 ),
so in our simpler setting, we augment our sentences
with statistically gender-indicative adjectives (such
aspretty and handsome , the former being used
more often in practice to modify nouns referring
to women and the latter, to men) and verbs (which
take arguments that are statistically more likely to
be men or women in large corpora). With these
sentences, we can determine how much the deter-
mination of the gender on gender-indeterminate
nouns is affected by statistically gender-indicative
contexts. We expect the incidence of correct
inﬂection to rise in cases when a stereotypical
contextual cue is also provided.
Our contributions are as follows: We offer a
new unambiguous benchmark to measure MT
models’ ability to mark gender appropriately in
20languages from English source. We ﬁnd that
all tested Transformer-based NMT models reach
fairly low accuracy—at best approximately 70%
accuracy (Portuguese and German) and at worst
below 50% (Urdu)—and do markedly better when
the word that makes the target gender explicit
(e.g., her,brother ) refers to a man as opposed
to a woman. Moreover, we ﬁnd that accuracy
is higher on examples for which the (statically
more frequent) gender of the occupation matches
the gender of the unambiguous triggering word,
compared to examples for which they don’t match.
2 Methods
Our method crucially relies upon on linguistic
theory to craft unambiguous examples. In most
attempts to measure gender bias in NMT, there
has been no ground-truth “correct translation”—
model “preferences” ( Stanovsky et al. ,2019 ;Source/Target Label
Src: My sister is a carpenter 4.CorrectTgt: Mi hermana es carpenteria(f) 4.
Src: That nurse 1is a funny man .WrongTgt: Esa enfermera(f) 1es un tipo gracioso .
Src: The engineer 1is her emotional mother .InconclusiveTgt: La ingenier´ ıa(?) 1es su madre emocional .
Table 1: Examples of source-translation pairs. The
gender-tags are shown in parenthesis and word-
alignments indicated with subscript.
Prates et al. ,2019 ) are reﬂected by the percentage
of examples for which the MT system chooses the
gender-stereotypical pronoun as opposed to the
anti-gender-stereotypical. However, since both
translations are practically possible in reality (for
example, janitors come in all genders), we feel
this setting might be overly optimistic about the
capabilities of current models.
Our set up has two main components: we have a
“trigger” (i.e., a noun or pronoun in the source sen-
tence that unambiguously refers to a person with
a particular known gender1), and we have an occu-
pation noun which bears no gender-marking in the
source language and can be inﬂected with various
genders in the target language. We call the former
class “triggers” because they are the unambiguous
signal which triggers a particular grammatical gen-
der marking for the occupation noun. Triggers com-
prise all “standard” American English pronouns
and explicitly gendered kinship terms, which were
chosen because they are very common concepts
cross-linguistically and are (in nearly all cases,
see fn. 1) interpreted as gender-unambiguous.
Occupation nouns were drawn from the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics2, following Caliskan
et al. (2017 );Rudinger et al. (2017 );Zhao et al.
(2018 );Prates et al. (2019 ), and are statistically
more likely to be performed by either women or by
men respectively. We ensure that there is an equal
number of triggers, occupation words, making our
benchmark gender-balanced for binary gender. For
a list, see Table 2 , and Table 5 in the Appendix.
Crucially, we measure performance based on the
inﬂection of the occupation noun, which depends
on the syntactic structure of the sentence. To en-
1Gender identity is not strictly binary, and even for our
strongly gendered triggers, there still could be rare edge- cases:
consider, for example, a Halloween party where your friend
Sam, who identiﬁes as a man, dresses up as his own grand-
mother. Someone can reasonably refer to Sam during the
party as a “grandmother” or choose either “she” or “he”; See
also ( Ackerman ,2019 ).
2http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11.htm
sure that we have unambiguous sentences, we con-
structed a short English phrase structure grammar
comprising 82 commands to construct our corpus.
Although previous datasets for measuring gender
failures in translation have had a handful unambigu-
ous examples ( Stanovsky et al. ,2019 ), our dataset
is unique in having only unambiguous examples
(see also Gonz´ alez et al. 2020 ). We also make use
of Binding Theory ( Chomsky ,1980 ,1981 ;B¨ uring ,
2005 ) to ensure that (i) all of our pronoun triggers
(both pronominals like “she” and anaphors like
“herself”) are strictly coreferring with the occu-
pations and (ii) that no other interpretations are
possible.3Moreover, having a grammar is useful,
since it allows for an increased diversity of source
sentences and better control over the context.
Since we anticipated poor performance on the
task, we also devised an easier scenario, where we
provide additionally contextual cues to the gender
of the relevant entity. In this work, we explore
two types of contextual cues, adjectives and verbs.
Our list of adjectives is the union of stereotyped
traits from several works in the social psychology
literature on traits as gender stereotyping ( Bem ,
1981 ;Prentice and Carranza ,2002 ;Haines et al. ,
2016 ;Eagly et al. ,2020 ), where they were normed
in the context of English. Verbs were automatically
discovered from Wikipedia using dependency
parses to ﬁnd verbs that take women or men
preferentially highly as subjects or direct objects
(Hoyle et al. ,2019 ).
Finally, given that we had already written a toy
grammar for English, we also craft our grammar
to enable the exploration of a couple subsidiary
questions about the nature of anaphoric relations:
for example, does accuracy depend on whether
the occupation precedes or follows the trigger?
Moreover, when we include a contextual cue that
is predictive of the gender required by the trigger
(e.g., handsome forbrother ), does accuracy change
when we attach it to the occupation (e.g., that hand-
some nurse is my brother ) instead of to the trigger
(that nurse is my handsome brother )? And ﬁnally,
3Consider the sentence “Carlotta’s dog accompanies her
to kindergarden” ( B¨ uring ,2005 , p.5). In this sentence, we can
interpret this sentence as meaning that the dog accompanies
Carlotta to kindergarden, or that the dog accompanies some
other woman or girl to kindergarden—to strengthen this
reading you can append to the front of the sentence the clause
something like “whenever Mary’s parents have to go to work
early, Carlotta’s dog accompanies her to kindergarden”. In
this way, “her” can refer to either Carlotta or to Mary. We
have avoided such ambiguity in our dataset.Type F M
Trigger she, her, hers, her-
self, sister , mother,
aunt, grandmother,
daughter, niece,
wife , girlfriendhe, him, his, him-
self, brother, father,
uncle, grandfather,
son, niece, husband,
boyfriend
Occupation editor, accountant,
auditor, attendant,
assistant, designer,
writer, baker, clerk,
cashier, counselor,
librarian, teacher,
cleaner, house-
keeper, nurse,
receptionist, hair-
dresser, secretaryengineer, physician,
plumber, carpenter,
laborer, driver,
sheriff, mover,
developer, farmer,
guard, chief, janitor,
lawyer, CEO, ana-
lyst, manager, super-
visor, salesperson
Table 2: Gendered words from our dataset. Accuracy
is measured on the occupation word, and the Trigger(s)
provide unambiguous information about the gender
identity of the person being referred to in the sentence.
Establishing co-reference between the two is obligatory,
based on the syntactic structures included in the dataset.
to what extent do these different syntactic factors
interact with each other or vary across languages?
2.1 Models
We evaluate gendered translation of two pretrained
open-source models, (i) OPUS-MT is a collection
of 1000+ bilingual and multilingual (for certain
translation directions) models ( Tiedemann and
Thottingal ,2020 ). The architecture of each model
was based on a standard transformer ( Vaswani et al. ,
2017 ) setup with 6 self-attentive layers in both,
the encoder and decoder network with 8 attention
heads in each layer. (ii) M2M-100 is a large mul-
tilingual model which supports “many-to-many”
translation directions ( Fan et al. ,2020 ). M2M-100
pretrained models are available in three sizes (418
Million parameters, 1.2 Billion parameters and 15
Billion parameters). We employ the small sized
models for our experiments which are based on
the transformer architecture with 12 encoder and
decoder layers and 16 attention heads.
2.2 Evaluation
Using our grammar, we generate English source
sentences and translate these into supported
target languages. To ascertain whether the
translation applied the correct morphological
marker on the target-side occupation noun, we
design a “reference-free” evaluation scheme.
Following Stanovsky et al. (2019 ), we extract
token-alignments between the source occupation
noun token and its translation in the target side. We
also extract morphological features for every token
in the target sequence, using a morphological tag-
ger. Thus, we can ascertain the gender associated
with the translated occupation noun (as judged by
the morphological tagger) and measure the NMT
models’ accuracy concerning gender translation.
We use Dou and Neubig (2021 ) for word-alignment
andQi et al. (2020 ) as our morphological tagger.
Note that our evaluation scheme only checks if
the appropriate gender marking is applied on the
occupation noun and does not check if the occupa-
tion noun itself has been translated correctly. Thus,
we do not prescribe our evaluation scheme as a
replacement for traditional MT evaluation using
BLEU or chrF++ scores ( Papineni et al. ,2002 ;
Popovi´ c ,2015 ).
Under our evaluation scheme, there are three
possible evaluation outcomes for each sentence.
We deem the output (i) correct if the gender
of the target-side occupation noun is the ex-
pected gender (based on the source-side trigger
gender). (ii) wrong if the gender of the target–
side occupation is explicitly the wrong gender,
and (iii) inconclusive if we are unable to make a
gender-determination of the target-side occupation
noun. A translation can result be inconclusive if
there are errors in the translation, word-alignments
or morphological tagger. In most, cases we ﬁnd
translation errors as the root cause of the inconclu-
sive result. Note: if errors predominate more for
one gender, this can also be taken as evidence of an
imbalance that needs rectiﬁcation.
3 Results
Our dataset is very difﬁcult for current
transformer-based models. We observe that ac-
curacy doesn’t exceed the low 70s for any language
(seeTable 3 ). This suggests that our dataset is ap-
preciably difﬁcult, suggesting that it provides good
signal about the failures of our current best models.
For all languages and all MT systems, accuracy
is higher when the trigger unambiguously refers
to a man than when it unambiguously refers to
a woman. In general, accuracy is lower when the
trigger requires feminine morphology, hovering
around 40% in most languages. The only language
for which accuracy on feminine triggers exceeds
50% is Serbian. For some languages, such as Urdu,
occupation nouns are rarely inﬂected with the cor-
rect gender marking for feminine triggers. TakenLanguage %Correct %Wrong %N/A
de 0.73 0.26 0.01
pt 0.72 0.26 0.02
cs 0.67 0.30 0.03
lt 0.63 0.35 0.02
pl 0.65 0.33 0.03
hr 0.65 0.31 0.04
fr 0.63 0.30 0.07
lv 0.62 0.36 0.02
es 0.61 0.21 0.17
ru 0.60 0.38 0.02
uk 0.60 0.37 0.03
el 0.59 0.34 0.07
ro 0.59 0.33 0.08
ca 0.56 0.23 0.21
he 0.55 0.32 0.13
it 0.53 0.25 0.22
sr 0.52 0.42 0.06
hi 0.51 0.39 0.10
be 0.51 0.33 0.17
ur 0.44 0.37 0.19
Table 3: Aggregated accuracy for all languages and all
data for M2M-100-1.2B.
in aggregate, these results likely reﬂect the cultural
fact than many (but not all) languages utilize mascu-
line to refer to generic people ( Gastil ,1990 ;Hamil-
ton,1991 ). Despite this, all our triggers are high fre-
quency words, so we believe that a frequency based
explanation of our ﬁndings won’t be sufﬁcient.
Accuracy is higher when trigger gender and
occupation gender match, than when they
don’t. . . As we see in Figure 1 , the M2M models
perform better on inﬂecting occupations nouns
correctly when they are statistically more likely to
refer to a person whose gender matches the gender
required by the trigger: for example, our models
is better at correctly morphologically gender
marking nanny (a statistically feminine-indicative
occupation) in the context of mother than they
are at morphologically gender marking janitor
(a statistically masculine-indicative one). This
ﬁnding replicates previous work ( Stanovsky et al. ,
2019 ) that showed that six then-state-of-the-art
models were very susceptible to statistical gender
biases encoded in occupation words.
. . . However, gender marking accuracy drops
less when the occupation is mismatched with a
masculine trigger than when it is mismatched
with a feminine one. Although statistical gender
biases in how women are presented of the kind
presented in Figure 1 are relatively well described
in NLP and adjacent ﬁelds ( Bolukbasi et al. ,2016 ;
Hovy and Spruit ,2016 ;Caliskan et al. ,2017 ;
Rudinger et al. ,2017 ;Garg et al. ,2018 ;Garimella
avg
deptpl
csru
lt
lv
uk
hr
fr
elesro
hi
he
itur
ca
besr00.20.40.60.81
(a) M-trigger, M-occupation
avg
deptpl
csru
lt
lv
uk
hr
fr
elesro
hi
he
itur
ca
besr00.20.40.60.81
(b) F-trigger, F-occupationavg
deptpl
csru
lt
lv
uk
hr
fr
elesro
hi
he
itur
ca
besr00.20.40.60.81
(c) M-trigger, F-occupation
avg
deptpl
csru
lt
lv
uk
hr
fr
elesro
hi
he
itur
ca
besr00.20.40.60.81
(d) F-trigger, M-occupation
Figure 1: Results for M2M model (1.2B). Proportion of correc t (green), incorrect (red) and not available (yellow)
are provided. Across the board, for all languages, gender in ﬂection (green) are more correct for masculine triggers,
MM (a) and MF (c) than feminine triggers FF (b) and FM (d). Accu racy is high for both masculine- and feminine-
triggers when the the occupation is indicative of the target gender (a, b) than when it isn’t (c,d). However, accuracy
falls more more for F-triggers than for M-triggers when targ et occupation is indicative of the mismatched gender.
et al. ,2019 ;Gonen and Goldberg ,2019 ;Dinan
et al.,2020a ,b), we further observe in our results yet
a higher order type of stereotyping that negatively
affects women, namely androcentrism (Bem ,1993 ;
Hegarty et al. ,2013 ;Bailey et al. ,2019 ). Androcen-
trism is a wide reaching cultural phenomenon that
treats the “male experience. . . as a neutral standard
or norm for the culture of the species as a whole”
(Bem ,1993 , p. 41)—one consequence of this
cultural phenomenon is that women are restricted
to their stereotypical domains more than men are
to theirs. We see some tentative evidence that our
MT systems encode this cultural androcentrism
bias in the fact that the drop in accuracy is greater
for sentences with feminine triggers (e.g., mother )
and masculine-indicative occupations ( janitor )
than for the converse (compare the magnitude of
the drop in Figure 1 andFigure 2 between a and c
to the drop between b and d, as well as Table 4 ).
Models achieve higher accuracy for masculine-
indicative than feminine-indicative occupation
(and there is some variation). Finally, to
understand the behavior of particular occupations,
we plot the M2M 1.2B accuracy by occupation
averaged across all languages. Recall that all
occupations are frequent, are either statistically
biased towards either men or towards women in the
source, and are balanced in the dataset. In Figure 2 ,
we observe that in the case of feminine grammati-
cal gender triggers, only a few feminine-indicativeoccupations (e.g. houskeeper, nurse, secretary
inFigure 2 b, d) reach the level of accuracy that
the model achieves on most masculine-indicative
occupations (in Figure 2 a, c). We also note that
variation in accuracy is much higher for feminine-
indicative occupations across both trigger types
(compare Figure 2 b to c). These results also lend
support to a cultural androcentrism hypothesis.
4 Related Work
Recently, several works ( Stanovsky et al. ,2019 ;
Prates et al. ,2019 ;Gonen and Webster ,2020 ;
Gonz´ alez et al. ,2020 ) investigated gender bias in
multiple languages with complex morphology, and
showed that state-of-the-art MT systems resolve
gender-unbalanced occupation nouns (from the
US Bureau of Labor Statistics) more often to
masculine than feminine pronouns, despite the fact
that people of many genders participate in all listed
occupations. Our work improves upon these prior
approaches by exploring the effects of gender-
indicative contexts (e.g., additionally stereotypi-
cally masculine and feminine traits and events) in
range of syntactic positions (e.g., preceding or fol-
lowing the clue, directly adjacent to the occupation,
etc.). While Prates et al. (2019 ) did investigate
some stereotypical traits in their work, they only
investigate a few of them, only in the context of the
ambiguous paradigm, and were narrowly focused
on measuring the translation abilities of one com-
avg
laborerphysician
engineer
sheriffsupervisor
lawyer
farmer
chiefcarpenter
salesperson
developer
driverplumbermanager
analyst
janitor
mover
guard
ceo00.20.40.60.81
(a) M-trigger M-occupation
avg
housekeeper
nurse
secretary
librarian
teacherreceptionist
hairdresser
attendant
cleaner
baker
writer
cashier
assistant
accountant
counselor
clerk
editor
auditordesigner00.20.40.60.81
(b) F-trigger F-occupationavg
counselor
writer
editordesigner
cashier
auditor
accountant
baker
teacher
clerk
cleaner
hairdresser
librarian
assistant
attendantsecretary
receptionist
housekeeper
nurse00.20.40.60.81
(c) M-trigger F-occupation
avg
laborerguard
salesperson
plumber
carpenter
janitor
lawyer
mover
farmersupervisor
developer
analyst
engineer
physicianmanager
ceo
chief
sheriff
driver00.20.40.60.81
(d) F-trigger, M-occupation
Figure 2: Results for M2M model (1.2B). Proportion of correc t (green), incorrect (red) and not available (yellow) are
provided. Across the board, for all occupations, accuracy i s higher when triggered gender matches the occupation
(a, b), then when it mismatches (c, d). Additionally, accura cy is higher for masculine triggers (a, c) than for feminine
ones (b, d).
mercial translation product. We, on the other hand,
explore not only more diverse example traits as well
as additional verbal contextual cues, but we do so in
unambiguously gendered sentences with a diverse
range of sentences structures that allow us to vary
linear precedence of contextual cues as well as their
prevalence. Gonen and Webster (2020 ) also made
use of minimally different sentences via an innova-
tive perturbation method that mines examples from
real world data and moves away from static word
lists; however, their benchmark is also collected
for the standard ambiguous gender setting.
Of particular note here is Gonz´ alez et al. (2020 )
which also focused on “unforgivable” grammatical
gender-related errors in translation (as well as on
other tasks) that come about as a result of syntactic
structure and unambiguous coreference. In partic-
ular, Gonz´ alez et al. investigated four languages
(Danish, Russian, Chinese, Swedish) that afﬁx a
reﬂexive marker to disambiguate whether a 3rd
person possessive pronoun (e.g., his) must be obli-
gatorily bound by its local referent (i.e., the subject
of the sentence) or not. This approach is somewhat
analogous to some of our examples, except that we
rely on syntactic context to construct unambiguous
examples as opposed to language-internal proper-
ties: e.g., particularly those that make use of “own”to make obligatory the local coreference (in this
case cataphora) as in “That her ownchild cried, sur-
prised the doctor”. We take our work to be wholly
complementary to theirs; while their approach
focuses on more source languages, fewer target
languages, and a wider range of tasks, we focus
on fewer source languages, more target languages,
and sentences from a wider range of (source) syn-
tactic structures (as determined by our grammar).
Concurrently, another approach to pronoun
coreference utilized a hand-crafted grammar to
generate sentences for measuring fairness ( Sore-
mekun et al. ,2020 ), but in the context of NLP tasks
other than NMT. Although Soremekun et al. (2020 )
are interested in measuring performance for unam-
biguous examples, it does not focused on the NMT
use case, and its examples require cross-sentential
coreferences, which will likely require a more
complex linguistic toolbox than our intrasentential
case ( Szabolcsi ,2003 ;Hardmeier and Federico ,
2010 ;Reinhart ,2016 ). Moreover, the grammar
created in that work is much less developed than
ours: it does not manipulate the location of the trig-
ger, there is limited syntactic diversity, and there
is no incorporation of statistically gender-biased
words above and beyond occupation nouns.
At a high level, our work resurfaces problems
M2M-100-1.2B Opus MT
Language ∆M∆F∆M∆F
be 0.17 0.25
ca 0.13 0.25 0.20 0.29
cs 0.23 0.33 0.16 0.19
de 0.16 0.30 0.16 0.22
el 0.08 0.19
es 0.14 0.27 0.14 0.20
fr 0.15 0.25 0.16 0.24
he 0.00 0.29 -0.02 0.29
hi -0.04 0.02
hr 0.22 0.28
it 0.11 0.23 0.17 0.23
lt 0.05 0.10
lv 0.15 0.20
pl 0.19 0.34
pt 0.15 0.25
ro 0.12 0.17 0.14 0.22
sr 0.16 0.23
uk 0.19 0.30 0.12 0.19
ur -0.02 -0.01
Table 4: Accuracy drop ( ∆) is greater for feminine
triggers when the occupation is statistically indicative o f
the mismatched gender (M) than for masculine triggers
when the occupations is statistically indicative of the
mismatched gender (F) For example, ∆Mrefers to the
drop in accuracy for sentences with triggers referring to
men when the occupation is switched to stereotypically
referring to women (e.g., difference in accuracy between
“my father is a funny doctor” and “my father is a funny
nurse”. Bold marks the delta with larger accuracy drop.
with syntactic agreement in machine translation.
While neural machine translations are more ﬂuent
that phrase-based machine translation, it has long
been observed that even high-resource models can
struggle to generate faithful translations that are
also syntactically correct ( Isabelle et al. ,2017 ) and
the problem intensiﬁes for longer sentences with
long-distance dependencies ( Choshen and Abend ,
2019 ). We highlight yet another syntactic failure
mode in NMT models in this work. There is also a
long history of incorporating syntax explicitly into
NMT models in the hope of reducing the preva-
lence of such errors. For example, Eriguchi et al.
(2016 ) model source-side syntax while Aharoni
and Goldberg (2017 ) proposed models that gener-
ate linearized dependency trees. Other works also
consider modiﬁcations to the attention mechanism
in order to improve NMT ( Kim et al. ,2017 ).
5 Conclusion
Many of our NLP tasks and dataset have been
found to be rife with statistical gender biases that
reﬂect, in language, the stereotypical associations
we have about gender in our cultures. In this
work, we present a new evaluation dataset formeasuring gender bias in machine translation
for gender unambiguous sentences. Our dataset
supports translation from an English source into 20
languages, and is designed to answer questions not
only about particular occupation words and gender
triggering words, but also to further explicate
the role of context in how MT systems translate
gender morphology. We hope that our dataset will
encourage the community to improve on this new
setting for measuring gender biases in language.
References
Lauren Ackerman. 2019. Syntactic and cognitive issues
in investigating gendered coreference. Glossa: a
journal of general linguistics , 4(1).
Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Towards
string-to-tree neural machine translation . In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers) , pages 132–140, Vancouver, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
April H Bailey, Marianne LaFrance, and John F Dovidio.
2019. Is man the measure of all things? a social
cognitive account of androcentrism. Personality and
Social Psychology Review , 23(4):307–331.
Lo¨ ıc Barrault, Magdalena Biesialska, Ondˇ rej Bojar,
Marta R. Costa-juss` a, Christian Federmann, Yvette
Graham, Roman Grundkiewicz, Barry Haddow,
Matthias Huck, Eric Joanis, Tom Kocmi, Philipp
Koehn, Chi-kiu Lo, Nikola Ljubeˇ si´ c, Christof
Monz, Makoto Morishita, Masaaki Nagata, Toshiaki
Nakazawa, Santanu Pal, Matt Post, and Marcos
Zampieri. 2020. Findings of the 2020 conference
on machine translation (WMT20) . In Proceedings
of the Fifth Conference on Machine Translation ,
pages 1–55, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Sandra L Bem. 1981. Bem sex role inventory. Journal
of personality and social psychology .
Sandra L Bem. 1993. The lenses of gender: Transform-
ing the debate on sexual inequality . Yale University
Press.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. 2016.
Man is to computer programmer as woman is to
homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In
Advances in neural information processing systems ,
pages 4349–4357.
Daniel B¨ uring. 2005. Binding theory . Cambridge
University Press.
Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automati-
cally from language corpora contain human-like
biases. Science , 356(6334):183–186.
Noam Chomsky. 1980. On binding. Linguistic inquiry ,
11(1):1–46.
Noam Chomsky. 1981. Lectures on government and
binding: The Pisa lectures . Foris Publications,
Holland.
Leshem Choshen and Omri Abend. 2019. Auto-
matically extracting challenge sets for non-local
phenomena in neural machine translation . In
Proceedings of the 23rd Conference on Compu-
tational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL) ,
pages 291–303, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack
Urbanek, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2020a.
Queens are powerful too: Mitigating gender bias
in dialogue generation . In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8173–8188,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Ledell Wu, Jason Weston,
Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. 2020b. Multi-di-
mensional gender bias classiﬁcation . InProceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
314–331, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Zi-Yi Dou and Graham Neubig. 2021. Word alignment
by ﬁne-tuning embeddings on parallel corpora.
InConference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL) .
Alice H Eagly, Christa Nater, David I Miller, Mich` ele
Kaufmann, and Sabine Sczesny. 2020. Gender
stereotypes have changed: A cross-temporal meta-
analysis of us public opinion polls from 1946 to 2018.
American psychologist , 75(3):301.
Akiko Eriguchi, Kazuma Hashimoto, and Yoshimasa
Tsuruoka. 2016. Tree-to-sequence attentional neural
machine translation . InProceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 823–833,
Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Angela Fan, Shruti Bhosale, Holger Schwenk, Zhiyi
Ma, Ahmed El-Kishky, Siddharth Goyal, Mandeep
Baines, Onur Celebi, Guillaume Wenzek, Vishrav
Chaudhary, et al. 2020. Beyond english-centric
multilingual machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11125 .
Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and
James Zou. 2018. Word embeddings quantify
100 years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,
115(16):E3635–E3644.Aparna Garimella, Carmen Banea, Dirk Hovy, and
Rada Mihalcea. 2019. Women’s syntactic resilience
and men’s grammatical luck: Gender-bias in
part-of-speech tagging and dependency parsing .
InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 3493–3498, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
John Gastil. 1990. Generic pronouns and sexist
language: The oxymoronic character of masculine
generics. Sex roles , 23(11):629–643.
Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick on a
pig: Debiasing methods cover up systematic gender
biases in word embeddings but do not remove them.
InProceedings of the 2019 Workshop on Widening
NLP, pages 60–63, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Hila Gonen and Kellie Webster. 2020. Automatically
identifying gender issues in machine translation
using perturbations . In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages
1991–1995, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ana Valeria Gonz´ alez, Maria Barrett, Rasmus Hvin-
gelby, Kellie Webster, and Anders Søgaard. 2020.
Type B reﬂexivization as an unambiguous testbed for
multilingual multi-task gender bias . InProceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
2637–2648, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Elizabeth L Haines, Kay Deaux, and Nicole Lofaro.
2016. The times they are a-changing. . . or are they
not? a comparison of gender stereotypes, 1983–2014.
Psychology of Women Quarterly , 40(3):353–363.
Mykol C Hamilton. 1991. Masculine bias in the attri-
bution of personhood: People= male, male= people.
Psychology of Women Quarterly , 15(3):393–402.
Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010.
Modelling pronominal anaphora in statistical ma-
chine translation. In IWSLT (International Workshop
on Spoken Language Translation); Paris, France;
December 2nd and 3rd, 2010. , pages 283–289.
Peter Hegarty, Orla Parslow, Y G´ avriel Ansara, and
Freyja Quick. 2013. Androcentrism: Changing the
landscape without leveling the playing ﬁeld. The
Sage handbook of gender and psychology , pages
29–44.
Dirk Hovy and Shannon L Spruit. 2016. The social im-
pact of natural language processing. In Proceedings
of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
pages 591–598.
Alexander Miserlis Hoyle, Lawrence Wolf-Sonkin,
Hanna Wallach, Isabelle Augenstein, and Ryan
Cotterell. 2019. Unsupervised discovery of gen-
dered language through latent-variable modeling .
InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 1706–1716, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Pierre Isabelle, Colin Cherry, and George Foster. 2017.
A challenge set approach to evaluating machine
translation . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing , pages 2486–2496, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yoon Kim, Carl Denton, Luong Hoang, and Alexan-
der M Rush. 2017. Structured attention networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.00887 .
Lesly Miculicich, Dhananjay Ram, Nikolaos Pappas,
and James Henderson. 2018. Document-level neural
machine translation with hierarchical attention
networks . InProceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 2947–2954, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation . InProceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 311–318, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Maja Popovi´ c. 2015. chrF: character n-gram f-score
for automatic MT evaluation . InProceedings of the
Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation ,
pages 392–395, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Marcelo OR Prates, Pedro H Avelar, and Luis C Lamb.
2019. Assessing gender bias in machine transla-
tion: a case study with google translate. Neural
Computing and Applications , pages 1–19.
Deborah A Prentice and Erica Carranza. 2002. What
women and men should be, shouldn’t be, are allowed
to be, and don’t have to be: The contents of pre-
scriptive gender stereotypes. Psychology of women
quarterly , 26(4):269–281.
Peng Qi, Yuhao Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Jason Bolton, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2020. Stanza: A python
natural language processing toolkit for many human
languages . InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
System Demonstrations , pages 101–108, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tanya Reinhart. 2016. Anaphora and semantic
interpretation . Routledge.
Rachel Rudinger, Chandler May, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2017. Social bias in elicited natural
language inferences . InProceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing ,pages 74–79, Valencia, Spain. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ezekiel Soremekun, Sakshi Udeshi, and Sudipta Chat-
topadhyay. 2020. Astraea: Grammar-based fairness
testing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02542 .
Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A. Smith, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2019. Evaluating gender bias in machine
translation . InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 1679–1684, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Anna Szabolcsi. 2003. Binding on the ﬂy: Cross-
sentential anaphora in variable-free semantics. In
Resource-sensitivity, binding and anaphora , pages
215–227. Springer.
J¨ org Tiedemann and Yves Scherrer. 2017. Neural ma-
chine translation with extended context . InProceed-
ings of the Third Workshop on Discourse in Machine
Translation , pages 82–92, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
J¨ org Tiedemann and Santhosh Thottingal. 2020.
OPUS-MT – building open translation services
for the world . In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
Conference of the European Association for Machine
Translation , pages 479–480, Lisboa, Portugal.
European Association for Machine Translation.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need . In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente
Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018. Gender bias
in coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing
methods . In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages
15–20, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Type F M
Context Adj affected, affection-
ate, appreciative,
emotional, excitable,
imaginative, impres-
sionable, intelligent,
organized, outgoing,
unambitious, under-
standing, unintelligent,
unselﬁsh, unstable,
cautious, changeable,
charming, cheer-
ful, childlike, clean,
compassionate, com-
plaining, complicated,
confused, cooperative,
creative, critical, cu-
rious, dainty, delicate,
dependent, dreamy,
family-oriented, fash-
ionable, fault-ﬁnding,
fearful, feminine,
ﬁckle, ﬂatterable, ﬂir-
tatious, foolish, forgiv-
ing, friendly, frivolous,
fussy, gentle, graceful,
gullible, helpful, hon-
est, kind, loyal, melo-
dramatic, mild, mod-
est, naive, nervous, pa-
tient, pleasant, polite,
prudish, romantic, self-
pitying, sensitive, sen-
timental, sexy, short,
shy, small-boned,
smart, soft, soft-
hearted, sophisticated,
spiritual, submissive,
suggestive, supersti-
tious, sympathetic,
talkative, tender,
timid, touchy, warm,
weak, well-dressed,
well-mannered, whole-
some, worrying,
yieldingaggressive, active, ad-
venturous, aggressive,
ambitious, analytical,
arrogant, assertive,
athletic, autocratic,
enterprising, indepen-
dent, indifferent, indi-
vidualistic, initiative,
innovative, intense,
inventive, obnoxious,
opinionated, oppor-
tunistic, unfriendly,
unscrupulous, bossy,
broad-shouldered,
capable, coarse, com-
petitive, conceited,
conﬁdent, consistent,
controlling, coura-
geous, cruel, cynical,
decisive, demanding,
dependable, deter-
mined, disciplined,
disorderly, dominant,
forceful, greedy, hard-
hearted, hardworking,
humorous, jealous,
lazy, level-headed, log-
ical, loud, masculine,
muscular, pleasure-
seeking, possessive,
precise, progressive,
promiscuous, proud,
quick, rational, re-
alistic, rebellious,
reckless, resourceful,
rigid, robust, self-
conﬁdent, self-reliant,
self-righteous, self-
sufﬁcient, selﬁsh,
serious, sharp-witted,
show-off, solemn,
solid, steady, stern,
stingy, stolid, strong,
stubborn, sturdy, tall,
tough, well-built,
witty
Context V-OBJ protect, treat, shame,
exploit insult, scare,
frighten, distract,
escortreward, glorify, thank,
praise, honor, inspire,
enrich, appease, con-
gratulate, respect,
ﬂatter, destroy, de-
ceive, bore, offend,
scold, pay, ﬁght, defeat
Context V-SUBJ smile, dance, laugh,
play, giggle, weep,
faint, scream, gossip,
complain, lament,
spin, celebrate, clapsucceed, ﬂourish, pros-
per, win, protest, kill,
threaten, rush, speak
Table 5: Gendered context words from our dataset.