Title: Partitioned Variational Inference: A unified framework encompassing federated and continual learning

Partitioned Variational Inference: A uniﬁed framework
encompassing federated and continual learning
Thang D. Bui1, Cuong V. Nguyen2, Siddharth Swaroop2, and Richard E. Turner2
1University of Sydney, Australia; thang.buivn@gmail.com
2University of Cambridge, UK; {vcn22,ss2163,ret26}@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
Variational inference (VI) has become the method of choice for ﬁtting many modern probabilistic
models. However, practitioners are faced with a fragmented literature that oﬀers a bewildering
array of algorithmic options. First, the variational family. Second, the granularity of the updates
e.g. whether the updates are local to each data point and employ message passing or global. Third,
the method of optimization (bespoke or blackbox, closed-form or stochastic updates, etc.). This
paper presents a new framework, termed Partitioned Variational Inference (PVI), that explicitly
acknowledges these algorithmic dimensions of VI, uniﬁes disparate literature, and provides guidance
on usage. Crucially, the proposed PVI framework allows us to identify new ways of performing
VI that are ideally suited to challenging learning scenarios including federated learning (where
distributed computing is leveraged to process non-centralized data) and continual learning (where
new data and tasks arrive over time and must be accommodated quickly). We showcase these new
capabilities by developing communication-eﬃcient federated training of Bayesian neural networks
and continual learning for Gaussian process models with private pseudo-points. The new methods
signiﬁcantly outperform the state-of-the-art, whilst being almost as straightforward to implement as
standard VI.
1 Introduction
Variational methods recast approximate inference as an optimization problem, thereby enabling advances
in optimization to be leveraged for inference. VI has enabled approaches including natural gradient
methods, mirror-descent, trust region and stochastic (mini-batch) optimization to be tapped in this way.
The approach has been successful, with VI methods often lying on the eﬃcient frontier of approximate
inference’s speed-accuracy trade-oﬀ. VI has consequently become one of the most popular varieties of
approximate inference. For example, it is now a standard approach for Gaussian process models [Titsias,
2009], latent topic models [Blei et al., 2003], and deep generative models [Kingma and Welling, 2014].
Deployment of VI requires the practitioner to make three fundamental choices. First, the form of the
approximate family which ranges from simple mean-ﬁeld or factorized distributions, through unfactorized
exponential families to complex non-exponential family distributions. Second, the granularity of
variational inference which includes, on the one hand, approaches based on the global variational
free-energy, and on the other those that consider a single data point at a time and employ local
message passing. Third, the form of the variational updates which encompasses the optimization method
employed for maximizing the global variational free-energy or the form of the message passing updates.
A large body of work has investigated how the choice of approximating family aﬀects the accuracy
of VI [MacKay, 2003, Wang and Titterington, 2004, Turner and Sahani, 2011] and how additional
approximations can enable VI to support more complex approximate families [Jaakkola and Jordan,
1arXiv:1811.11206v1  [stat.ML]  27 Nov 2018
1998, Rezende and Mohamed, 2015, Salimans et al., 2015, Ranganath et al., 2016, Mescheder et al., 2017].
This is a fundamental question, but it is orthogonal to the focus of the current paper. Instead, we focus
on the second two choices. The granularity of variational inference is an important algorithmic dimension.
Whilst global variational inference has more theoretical guarantees and is arguably simpler to implement,
local variational inference oﬀers unique opportunities for online or continual learning (e.g. allowing ‘old’
data to be sporadically revisited) and distributed computing (e.g. supporting asynchronous lock-free
updates). The form of the updates is equally important with a burgeoning set of alternatives. For global
VI these including gradient ascent, natural gradient and mirror descent, approximate second-order
methods, stochastic versions thereof, collapsed VI and ﬁxed-point updates to name but a few. For local
VI, there has been less exploration of the options, but damping in natural and moment space is often
employed.
The goal of this paper is to develop a unifying framework, termed Partitioned Variational Infer-
ence (PVI), that explicitly acknowledges that the granularity and the optimization method are two
fundamental algorithmic dimensions of VI. The new framework 1. generalizes and extends current
theoretical results in this area, 2. reveals the relationship between a large number of existing schemes,
and 3. identiﬁes opportunities for innovation, a selection of which are demonstrated in experiments.
We brieﬂy summarize the contributions of this paper, focusing on the uniﬁed viewpoint and novel
algorithmic extensions to support federated and continual learning.
1.1 Uniﬁcation
The main theoretical contributions of the paper, described in sections 2 to 4, are: to develop Partitioned
Variational Inference; clean up, generalize and derive new supporting theory (including PVI ﬁxed-point
optimization, mini-batch approximation, hyperparameter learning); and show that PVI subsumes
standard global variational inference, (local) variational message passing, and other well-established
approaches. In addition, we also show in section 4 that damped ﬁxed-point optimization and natural
gradient methods applied to PVI are equivalent to variationally-limited power EP.
In section 4 PVI is used to connect a large literature that has become fragmented with separated
strandsofrelated, butmutuallyuncitedwork. Morespeciﬁcallyweunifyworkon: onlineVI[Ghahramani
and Attias, 2000, Sato, 2001, Broderick et al., 2013, Bui et al., 2017b, Nguyen et al., 2018]; global
VI [Sato, 2001, Hensman et al., 2012, Hoﬀman et al., 2013, Salimans and Knowles, 2013, Sheth and
Khardon, 2016a, Sheth et al., 2015, Sheth and Khardon, 2016b]; local VI [Knowles and Minka, 2011,
Wand, 2014, Khan and Lin, 2018]; power EP and related algorithms [Minka, 2001, 2004, Li et al., 2015,
Hasenclever et al., 2017, Gelman et al., 2014]; and stochastic mini-batch variants of these algorithms
[Hoﬀman et al., 2013, Li et al., 2015, Khan and Lin, 2018]. Figures 2 and 3 and table 1 present a
summary of these relationships in the context of PVI.
1.2 Probabilistic inference for federated machine learning
The goal of federated learning is to enable distributed training of machine learning models without
centralizing data [see e.g. McMahan et al., 2017, Zhao et al., 2018]. This is challenging in practice as:
modern data sets can often be distributed inhomogeneously and unevenly across many machines,
forexamples, mobiledevicescancontainmanyimageswhichcanbeusedfortrainingaclassiﬁcation
model, but accessing such information is often restricted and privacy-sensitive;
computation resources available at terminal machines can be leveraged, but communication
between these machines or between them and a central server can be limited and unreliable,
for example, communication from and to mobile devices is often costly, and each device can be
abruptly disconnected from the training setup or, similarly, a new device can appear;
2
the inference or prediction step is often needed in an any-time fashion at each machine, i.e. each
machine needs to have access to a high-quality model to make predictions without having to send
data to a remote server.
These requirements are often not satisﬁed in the traditional training pipelines, many of which require
data to be stored in a single machine, or in a data center where it is typically distributed among
many machines in a homogeneous and balanced fashion [see e.g. Dean et al., 2012, Zhang et al., 2015,
Chen et al., 2016]. Federated learning attempts to bridge this gap by tackling the aforementioned
constraints. Additionally, this type of learning is arguably less privacy-sensitive as compared to
centralized learning approaches, as it does not require local data to be collected and sent to a central
server. It can also be further improved by employing encrypted aggregation steps [Bonawitz et al.,
2017] or diﬀerentially-private mechanisms [Dwork and Roth, 2014].
Distributed inference is also an active research area in the Bayesian statistics and machine learn-
ing literature. For example, parallel Markov chain Monte Carlo approaches typically run multiple
independent Markov chains on diﬀerent partitions of the data set, but require heuristics to aggregate,
reweight and average the samples at test time [see e.g. Wang and Dunson, 2013, Scott et al., 2016].
The closest to our work is the distributed EP algorithms of Gelman et al. [2014] and Hasenclever et al.
[2017], which employ (approximate) MCMC for data partitions and EP for communication between
workers. However, it is not clear these distributed approaches will work well in the federated settings
described above. In section 5, we demonstrate that PVI can naturally and ﬂexibly address the above
challenges, and thus be used for federated learning with eﬃcient synchronous or lock-free asynchronous
communication. The proposed approach can be combined with recent advances in Monte Carlo VI for
neural networks, enabling fast and communication-eﬃcient training of Bayesian neural networks on
non-iid federated data. We provide an extensive experiment comparing to alternative approaches in
section 7.
1.3 Probabilistic inference for continual learning
Continual learning (also termed online learning or life-long learning or incremental learning) is the
ability to learn continually and adapt quickly to new experiences without catastrophically forgetting
previously seen experiences [Schlimmer and Fisher, 1986, McCloskey and Cohen, 1989, Sutton and
Whitehead, 1993, Ratcliﬀ, 1990]. Such requirements arise in many practical settings in which data
can arrive sequentially or tasks may change over time (e.g. new classes may be discovered), or entirely
new tasks can emerge. Batch learning algorithms which deal with the entire data set at once are not
applicable in these settings, as (1) data can arrive one point at a time or in batches of a size that is
unknown a priori, or in a possibly non i.i.d. way; and (2) previously seen data may not be directly
accessible, which means the continual learning algorithms need to intelligently decide how to best
combine prior or current experience with new data while being resistant to under-ﬁtting or over-ﬁtting
to new data (i.e. intransigence vs forgetting).
Continual learning has a rich literature [see e.g. Opper, 1998, Sato, 2001, Ghahramani and Attias,
2000, Csató and Opper, 2002, Minka, 2001, Smola et al., 2004] but is enjoying a resurgence of interest
ranging from deepening understanding of transfer learning and catastrophic forgetting [Goodfellow
et al., 2014, Flesch et al., 2018], to developing learning algorithms for various models and applications
[Broderick et al., 2013, Li and Hoiem, 2016, Kirkpatrick et al., 2017, Zenke et al., 2017, Seﬀ et al., 2017,
Bui et al., 2017a, Nguyen et al., 2018, Zeno et al., 2018, Chaudhry et al., 2018], to setting up relevant
metrics and benchmarks for evaluation [Lomonaco and Maltoni, 2017, Hayes et al., 2018]. While the
PVI framework enables us to connect and unify much of the literature in this area, it also allows gaps in
the literature to be identiﬁed and enables the development of new and improved algorithmic solutions.
We demonstrate this in section 6 by presenting a new continual learning method for Gaussian process
regression and classiﬁcation that greatly extends earlier work by Csató and Opper [2002] and Bui et al.
3
[2017a], allowing principled handling of hyperparameters and private pseudo-points for new data. The
new technique is shown to be superior to alternative online learning approaches on various toy and
real-world data sets in section 7. We also show in section 5 that continual learning can be reframed as
a special case of federated learning.
2 Partitioned Variational Inference
In this section, we introduce Partitioned Variational Inference, a framework that encompasses many
approaches to variational inference. We begin by framing PVI in terms of a series of local variational
free-energy optimization problems, proving several key properties of the algorithm that reveal the
relationship to global VI. In order to keep the development clear, we have separated most of the
discussion of related work into section 4.
Consider a parametric probabilistic model deﬁned by the prior p(j)over parameters and the
likelihood function p(yj;) =QM
m=1p(ymj;), wherefy1;:::; yMgis a partition of yintoMgroups
of data points. Depending on the context, a data group ymcan be considered to be a mini-batch of
ywhich is ﬁxed across epochs, or a data shard. For simplicity, we assume for the moment that the
hyperparameters are ﬁxed and suppress them to lighten the notation. We will discuss hyperparameter
optimization at the end of this section.
Exact Bayesian inference in this class of model is in general intractable so we resort to variational
inference. In particular, we posit a variational approximation of the true posterior as follows,
q() =p()MY
m=1tm()1
Zp()MY
m=1p(ymj) =p(jy); (1)
whereZis the normalizing constant of the true posterior, or marginal likelihood. The approximate
likelihoodtm()will be reﬁned by PVI to approximate the eﬀect the likelihood term p(ymj)has on the
posterior. Note that the form of q()in(1)is similar to that employed by the expectation propagation
algorithm [Minka, 2001], but with two diﬀerences. First, the approximate posterior is not restricted to
lie in the exponential family, as is typically the case for EP. Second, the approximate posterior does
not include a normalizing constant. Instead, the PVI algorithm will automatically ensure that the
product of the prior and approximate likelihood factors in (1)is a normalized distribution. We will
show that PVI will return an approximation to the marginal likelihood logZ=logp(y)in addition to
the approximation of the posterior.
Algorithm 1 details the PVI algorithm. At each iteration i, we select an approximate likelihood
to reﬁne according to a schedule bi2f1:::Mg. The approximate likelihood t(i 1)
bi()obtained from
the previous iteration will be reﬁned and the corresponding data-group is denoted ybi. The reﬁnement
proceeds in two steps. First, we reﬁne the approximate posterior using the local (negative) variational
free energy q(i)() = argmaxq()2QF(i)(q())where the optimization is over a tractable family Qand
F(i)(q()) =Z
dq() logq(i 1)()p(ybij)
q()t(i 1)
bi(): (2)
Second, the new approximate likelihood is found by division, t(i)
bi() =q(i)()
q(i 1)()t(i 1)
bi().
We will now justify these steps by stating properties, derived in the appendix, that show 1) the
local free-energy optimization is equivalent to a variational KL optimization, 2) the update for the
approximate likelihoods is consistent with the normalized density speciﬁed in 1, and 3) any ﬁxed point
of the algorithm is also a local optimum of global VI and at this ﬁxed point the sum of the local
4
free-energies is equal to the global variational free-energy. The following properties apply for general
q(), and are not limited to the exponential family.1
Property 1 Maximizing the local free-energy F(i)(q())is equivalent to the KL optimization
q(i)() = argmin
q()2QKL
q()kbp(i)()
; (3)
wherebp(i)() =1
bZiq(i 1)()
t(i 1)
bi()p(ybij) =1
bZip(ybij)Q
m6=bit(i 1)
m()is known as the tilted distribution in the
EP literature and is intractable.
The proof is straightforward (see A.1). The tilted distribution can be justiﬁed as a sensible target
as it removes the approximate likelihood t(i 1)
bi()from the current approximate posterior and replaces
it with the true likelihood p(ybij). In this way, the tilted distribution comprises one true likelihood,
M 1approximate likelihoods and the prior. The KL optimization then ensures the new posterior
better approximates the true likelihood’s eﬀect, in the context of the approximate likelihoods and the
prior.
Property 2 At the end of each iteration i= 0;1;:::,q(i)() =p()QM
m=1t(i)
m().
Again the proof is simple (see A.2), but it relies on PVI initializing the approximate likelihood factors
to unity so that q(0)() =p().
Property 3 Letq() =p()QM
m=1t
m()be a ﬁxed point of Algorithm 1, Fm(q()) =Rdq()logq()p(ymj)
q()tm()be the local free-energy w.r.t. the factor tm, andF(q()) =
R
dq() logp()QM
m=1p(ymj)
q()be the global free-energy. We have:
(a)PM
m=1Fm(q()) =F(q()), i.e. the sum of the local free-energies is equal to the global
free-energy, i.e. the PVI ﬁxed point is an optimum of global VI,
(b) Ifq() = argmaxq()2QFm(q())for allm, thenq() = argmaxq()2QF(q()).
These results are more complex to show, but can be derived by computing the derivative and Hessian
of the global free-energy and substituting into these expressions the derivatives and Hessians of the
local free-energies (see A.3). The fact that the ﬁxed point of PVI recovers a global VI solution (both
the optimal q()and the global free-energy at this optimum) is the main theoretical justiﬁcation for
employing PVI. However, we do not believe that there is a Lyapunov function for PVI, indicating that
it may oscillate or diverge in general.
Having laid out the general framework for PVI, what remains to be decided is the method used for
optimizing the local free-energies. In a moment we consider three choices: analytic updates, oﬀ-the-shelf
optimization methods and ﬁxed-point iterations, as well as discussing how stochastic approximations
can be combined with these approaches. Before turning to these choices, we compare and contrast the
algorithmic beneﬁts of the local and global approaches to VI in diﬀerent settings. This discussion will
help shape the development of the optimization choices which follows.
2.1 When should a local VI approach be employed rather than a global one?
We will describe in section 4 how the PVI framework uniﬁes a large body of existing literature, thereby
providing a useful conceptual scaﬀold for understanding the relationship between algorithms. However,
1However, we will only consider exponential family approximations in the experiments in section 7.
5
Algorithm 1 Partitioned Variational Inference
Input:data partitionfy1;:::; yMg, priorp()
Initialize:
t(0)
m():= 1for allm= 1;2;:::;M:
q(0)():=p():
fori= 1;2;:::until convergence do
bi:=index of the next approximate likelihood to reﬁne.
Compute the new approximate posterior:
q(i)():= argmax
q()2QZ
dq() logq(i 1)()p(ybij)
q()t(i 1)
bi()
Update the approximate likelihood:
t(i)
bi():=q(i)()
q(i 1)()t(i 1)
bi(); (4)
t(i)
m():=t(i 1)
m()for allm6=bi:
end for
Figure 1: Steps of the PVI algorithm when being used for continual learning [left] and federated learning
[right].
it is important to ask: What algorithmic and computation beneﬁts, if any, arise from considering a set
of local free-energy updates, rather than a single global approximation (possibly leveraging stochastic
mini-batch approximation)?
In a nutshell, we will show that if the data set is ﬁxed before inference is performed (batch learning)
or arrives in a simple online iid way (simple online learning), and distributed computation is not available,
6
then global VI will typically be simpler to implement, require less memory, and faster to converge than
more local versions of PVI (the case of scaling collapsed bounds being a possible exception). However,
if the conditions above are not met, the local versions of PVI will be appropriate. We will now unpack
important examples of this sort.
The PVI approach is ideally suited to the distributed setting, with simple distributed variants
allowing asynchronous distributed updates. One simple approach, similar to that of Hasenclever et al.
[2017], uses Mworkers that are each allocated a data group ym. The workers store and reﬁne the
associated approximate likelihood tm(). A server maintains and updates the approximate posterior and
communicates it to the workers. An idle worker receives the current posterior from the server, optimizes
thelocalfree-energy, computesthechangeinthelocalapproximatelikelihood m() =t(new)
m()=t(old)
m(),
sends this to the server, and repeats. The local workers do not change q()directly. Instead, the server
maintains a queue of approximate likelihood updates and applies these to the approximate posterior
q(new)() =q(old)()m(). This setup supports asynchronous updates of the approximate likelihood
factors. See ﬁg. 1 for a pictorial depiction of these steps. In contrast, global VI is generally ill-suited to
the distributed setting. Although the free-energy optimization can be parallelized over data points,
typically this will only be advantageous for large mini-batches where the extra communication overhead
does not dominate. Large mini-batches often result in slow optimization progress (early in learning it is
often clear how to improve q()after seeing only a small number of data points). The special case of
global VI employing mini-batch approximations and natural gradient updates can support asynchronous
distributed processing if each worker receives statistically identical data and updates with the same
frequency. It could not operate successfully when each node contains diﬀerent amounts or types of data,
or if some workers update more frequently than others.
Distributed versions of PVI not only enable VI to be scaled to large problems, but they also allow
inference algorithms to be sent to user data, rather than requiring user data to be collected and
centralized before performing inference. Consider the situation where workers are personal devices,
like mobile phones, containing user data ym. Here the local free-energy updates can be performed
client-side on the user’s devices and only summaries tm()of the relevant aspects of that information
are communicated back to the central server. The frequency with which these messages are sent might
be limited to improve security. Such an implementation is arguably more secure than one in which the
user data (or associated gradients) are sent back to a central server [The Royal Society, 2017]. Since the
amount and type of data at the nodes is outside of the control of the algorithm designer, mini-batch
natural gradient global VI will generally be inappropriate for this setting.
The PVI approach is also well suited to the continual or life-long learning setting. These settings
are very general forms of online learning in which new data regularly arrive in a potentially non-iid
way, tasks may change over time, and entirely new tasks may emerge. In this situation, the PVI
framework can not only be used to continuously update the posterior distribution q()in light of new
data by optimizing the local free-energy for the newly seen data, it can also be used to revisit old
data groups (potentially in a judiciously selected way) thereby mitigating problems like catastrophic
forgetting. The update steps for this learning scenario are illustrated in ﬁg. 1. In contrast, global
VI is fundamentally ill-suited to the general online setting. The special case of global VI employing
mini-batch approximations with natural gradient updates may be appropriate when the data are iid
and only one update is performed for each new task (simple online learning), but it is not generally
applicable.
We will return to discuss the key issues raised in this section – the speed of convergence, memory
overhead, online learning, and distributed inference – in the context of diﬀerent options for carrying out
the optimization of the local free-energies in section 3.
7
2.2 Hyperparameter Learning
Many probabilistic models depend on a set of hyperparameters and it is often necessary to learn
suitable settings from data to achieve good performance on a task. One method is to optimize the
variational free-energy thereby approximating maximum likelihood learning. The gradient of the global
variational free-energy decomposes into a set of local computations, as shown in appendix B,
d
dF(;q()) =MX
m=1Eq()d
dlogp(ymj;)
+Eq()d
dlogp(j)
: (5)
This expression holds for general q()and is valid both for coordinate ascent (updating withq()
ﬁxed) and for optimizing the collapsed bound (where the approximate posterior optimizes the global
free-energy q() =q()and therefore depends implicitly on ). Notice that this expression is amenable
to stochastic approximation which leads to optimization schemes that use only local information at
each step. When combined with diﬀerent choices for the optimization of the local free-energies wrt q(),
this leads to a wealth of possible hyperparameter optimization schemes.
In cases where a distributional estimate for the hyperparameters is necessary, e.g. in continual
learning, the PVI framework above can be extended to handle the hyperparameters. In particular, the
approximate posterior in eq. (1) can be modiﬁed as follows,
q(;) =p()p(j)MY
m=1tm(;)1
Zp()p(j)MY
m=1p(ymj;) =p(;jy);; (6)
where the approximate likelihood factor tm(;)now involves both the model parameters and the
hyperparameters. Similar to eq. (2), the approximate posterior above leads to the following local
variational free-energy,
F(i)(q(;)) =Z
ddq(;) logq(i 1)(;)p(ybij;)
q(;)t(i 1)
bi(;): (7)
Note that this approach retains all favourable properties of PVI such as local computation and ﬂexibility
in choosing optimization strategies and stochastic approximations.
3 Approaches for Optimizing the Local Free-energies
Having established the general PVI algorithm and its properties, we will now describe diﬀerent options
for performing the optimization of the local free-energies.
3.1 Analytic Local Free-energy Updates
Each local free-energy is equivalent in form to a global free-energy with an eﬀective prior pe() =
q(i 1)()=t(i 1)
bi(). As such, in conjugate exponential family models the KL optimizations will be
available in closed form, for example in GP regression, and these updates can be substituted back
into the local variational free-energies to yield locally-collapsed bounds, Fn(q(i)()), that are useful for
hyperparameter optimization [Bui et al., 2017a]. One advantage of using local versions of PVI is that
this allows collapsed bounds to be leveraged on large data sets where an application to entire data set
would be computationally intractable, potentially speeding up convergence over global VI.
8
3.2 Oﬀ-the-shelf Optimizers for Local Free-energy Optimization
If analytic updates are not tractable, the local free-energy optimizations can be carried out using
standard optimizers. The PVI framework automatically breaks the data set into a series of local
free-energy optimization problems and the propagation of uncertainty between the data groups weights
the information extracted from each. This means non-stochastic optimizers such as BFGS can now be
leveraged in the large data setting. Of course, if a further stochastic approximation like Monte Carlo VI
is employed for each local optimization, stochastic optimizers such as RMSProp [Tieleman and Hinton,
2012] or Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014] might be more appropriate choices. In all cases, since the local free-
energy is equivalent in form to a global free-energy with an eﬀective prior pe() =q(i 1)()=t(i 1)
bi(),
PVI can be implemented via trivial modiﬁcation to existing code for global VI. This is a key advantage
of PVI over previous local VI approaches, such as variational message passing [Winn et al., 2005, Winn
and Minka, 2009, Knowles and Minka, 2011], in which bespoke and closed-form updates are needed for
diﬀerent likelihoods and cavity distributions.
3.3 Local Free-energy Fixed Point Updates, Natural Gradient Methods, and Mir-
ror Descent
An alternative to using oﬀ-the-shelf optimizers is to derive ﬁxed-point update equations by zeroing the
gradients of the local free-energy. These ﬁxed-point updates have elegant properties for approximate
posterior distributions that are in the exponential family.
Property 4 If the prior and approximate likelihood factors are in the un-normalized exponential family
tm() =tm(;m) =exp(|
mT())so that the variational distribution is in the normalized exponential
familyq() =exp(|
qT() A(q)), then the stationary point of the local free-energydF(i)(q())
dq= 0
implies
(i)
bi=C 1d
dqEq(logp(ybij)): (8)
where C:=d2A(q)
dqdq=covq()[T()T|()]is the Fisher Information. Moreover, the Fisher Information
can be written as C=dq
dqwhereq=Eq(T())is the mean parameter of q(). Hence,
(i)
bi=d
dqEq(logp(ybij)): (9)
For some approximate posterior distributions q(), taking derivatives of the average log-likelihood with
respect to the mean parameters is analytic (e.g. Gaussian) and for some it is not (e.g. gamma).
These conditions, derived in appendix A.4, can be used as ﬁxed point equations. That is, they can be
iterated possibly with damping ,
(i)
bi= (1 )(i 1)
bi+d
dqEq(logp(ybij)): (10)
These iterations, which form an inner-loop in PVI, are themselves not guaranteed to converge (there
is no Lyapunov function in general and so, for example, the local free-energy will not reduce at every
step).
The ﬁxed point updates are the natural gradients of the local free-energy and the damped versions
are natural gradient ascent [Sato, 2001, Hoﬀman et al., 2013]. The natural gradients could also be used in
other optimization schemes [Hensman et al., 2012, Salimbeni et al., 2018]. The damped updates are also
9
equivalent to performing mirror-descent [Raskutti and Mukherjee, 2015, Khan and Lin, 2018], a general
form of proximal algorithm [Parikh and Boyd, 2014] that can be interpreted as trust-region methods.
For more details about the relationship between these methods, see appendix A.7. Additionally, while
natural gradients or ﬁxed-point updates have been shown to be eﬀective in the batch global VI settings
[see e.g. Honkela et al., 2010], we present some result in appendix E.6 showing adaptive ﬁrst-order
methods employing ﬂat gradients such as Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014] performs as well as natural
gradient methods, when stochastic mini-batch approximations are used.
For these types of updates there is an interesting relationship between PVI and global (batch) VI:
Property 5 PVI methods employing parallel updates result in identical dynamics for q()given by the
following equation, regardless of the partition of the data employed
(i)
q=0+d
dq(i 1)Eq(logp(yj)) =0+NX
n=1d
dq(i 1)Eq(i 1)(logp(ynj)): (11)
See A.5 for the proof. If parallel ﬁxed-point updates are desired, then it is more memory eﬃcient to
employ batch VI M= 1, since then only one global set of natural parameters needs to be retained.
However, as previously discussed, using M= 1gives up opportunities for online learning and distributed
computation (e.g. asynchronous updates).
3.4 Stochastic mini-batch approximation
There are two distinct ways to apply stochastic approximations within the PVI scheme.
3.4.1 Stochastic Approximation within the Local Free-Energy
The ﬁrst form of stochastic approximation leverages the fact that each local free-energy decomposes
into a sum over data points and can, therefore, be approximated by sampling mini-batches within each
data group ym. In the case where each partition includes a large number of data points, this leads
to algorithms that converge more quickly than the batch variants – since a reasonable update for the
approximate posterior can often be determined from just a few data points – and this faster convergence
opens the door to processing larger data sets.
Mini-batch approximation can be employed in the general PVI case, but for simplicity we consider
the global VI case here M= 1. If simpliﬁed ﬁxed point updates are used for optimization, then
samplingLmini-batches of data from the data distribution yliidpdata(y)yields the following stochastic
approximation to the damped updates,2
(i)
q= (1 )(i 1)
q +
0+Ld
dqEq(logp(ylj))
; (12)
=(i 1)
q +0d
dqEq(logp(ylj)) (i 1)
like=L
: (13)
Here the ﬁrst form of the update is stochastic natural gradient ascent and the second form reveals the
implied deletion step where (i 1)
like=L= ((i 1)
q (i 1)
0)=Lis the contribution a mini-batch likelihood
makes to the posterior natural parameters on average. The rescaled learning rate is 0=L. These two
forms reveals that the mini-batch stochastic natural gradient update resembles an EP update step. See
appendix A.6 for full details.
2We have used a distinct notation for a mini-batch ( yl) and a data group ( ym) since the former will be selected iid
from the data set and will vary at each epoch, whilst the latter need not be determined in this way and is ﬁxed across
epochs.
10
3.4.2 Stochastic Scheduling of Updates Between Local Free-Energies
The second form of stochastic approximation is to randomize the update schedule. For example, using
M=Nand randomly selecting subsets of data to update in parallel. This can be memory intensive,
requiringNlocal natural parameters to be stored. A more memory eﬃcient approach is to ﬁx the
mini-batches across epochs and to visit the data groups ymin a random order [Khan and Lin, 2018].
For the simpliﬁed ﬁxed point updates, this yields
(i)
m= (1 )(i 1)
m +d
dq(i 1)Eq(i 1)(logp(ymj)): (14)
This approach results in a subtly diﬀerent update to qthat retains a speciﬁc approximation to the
likelihood of each data partition, rather than a single global approximation
(i)
q=(i 1)
q d
dqEq(logp(ymj)) (i 1)
m
: (15)
If the ﬁrst approach in eq. (14) employs learning rates that obey the Robins Munro conditions, the
ﬁxed points will be identical to the second approach in eq. (15) and they will correspond to optima of
the global free-energy.
3.4.3 Comparing and Contrasting Stochastic Approaches
There are pros and cons to both approaches. The ﬁrst approach in section 3.4.1 has a memory footprint
Ltimes smaller than the second approach in section 3.4.2 and can converge more quickly. For example,
on the ﬁrst pass through the data, it eﬀectively allows approximate likelihoods for as of yet unseen
data to be updated based on those for the data seen so far, which means that larger learning rates
can be used 0> . The second approach is required for continual learning, asynchronous updates,
and client-side processing where the assumption that each mini-batch is iid (and a single gradient step
is performed on each) is typically incorrect. The second approach also tends to produce less noisy
learning curves, with stochasticity only entering via the schedule and not as an approximation to the
local free-energy and the gradients thereof.
These approaches could also be combined, with stochastic scheduling selecting the local free-energy
to update next and mini-batch updates employed for each local free-energy optimization. See appendix
A.6 for a full discussion.
4 Uniﬁcation of Previous Work
The local VI framework described above uniﬁes a large number of existing approaches. These methods
include global VI (section 4.1), local VI (section 4.2), online VI (section 4.3) and a number of methods
based on power EP (sections 4.4 to 4.7). A schematic showing the relationships between these methods
at a high level is shown in ﬁg. 2. The literature has been organized into in ﬁg. 3 and table 1.
4.1 Global VI Fixed Point Methods
There has been a long history of applying the ﬁxed point updates for global VI (PVI where M= 1).
Sato [2001] derived them for conjugate exponential family models, showing they recover the closed
form updates for q(), and noting that damped ﬁxed point updates are equivalent to natural gradient
ascent with unit step size ( = 1). Sato’s insight was subsequently built upon by several authors.
Honkela et al. [2010] considered non-conjugate models, employed a Gaussian variational distribution
and used natural gradients to update the variational distribution’s mean. Hensman et al. [2012] and
11
Figure 2: Variational inference schemes encompassed by the PVI framework.
Hoﬀman et al. [2013] applied the insight to conjugate models when optimizing collapsed variational
free-energies and deriving stochastic natural gradient descent, respectively. Salimans and Knowles
[2013] apply the ﬁxed points to non-conjugate models where the expectations over qare intractable
and use Monte Carlo to approximate them, but they explicitly calculate the Fisher information matrix,
which is unnecessary for exponential family q. Sheth and Khardon [2016a] and Sheth et al. [2015] treat
non-conjugate models with Gaussian latent variables, employ the cancellation of the Fisher information,
and analyze convergence properties. Sheth and Khardon [2016b] further extend this to two level-models
through Monte Carlo essentially applying the Fisher information cancellation to Salimans and Knowles
[2013], but they were unaware of this prior work.
4.2 Fully Local VI Fixed Point Methods
There has also been a long history of applying the ﬁxed point updates in the fully local VI setting
(whereM=N). Knowles and Minka [2011] derive them for non-conjugate variational message passing,
but explicitly calculate the Fisher information matrix (except in a case where qwas univariate Gaussian
case where they do employ the cancellation). Wand [2014] simpliﬁed VMP by applying the Fisher
information cancellation to the case where q()is multivariate Gaussian. Khan and Lin [2018] also
extend VMP to employ MC approximation and the Fisher information cancellation. They were unaware
of Wand [2014], but extend this work by treating a wider range of approximate posteriors and models,
stochastic updates, and a principled approach to damping. The work is closely related to Salimans and
Knowles [2013] and Sheth and Khardon [2016b], since although these papers use ﬁxed-point updates for
global VI, they show that these decompose over data points and thereby derive mini-batch updates
that closely resemble ﬁxed-point local VI. This is a result of property 5.
4.3 Online, Streaming, Incremental and Continual VI as a single pass of PVI
If PVI makes a single pass through the data, the approximate likelihoods do not need to be explicitly
computed or stored as data-groups are not revisited. In this case PVI reduces to initializing the
approximate posterior to be the prior, q(0)() =p()and then optimizing a sequence of local free-
energies
q(i)():= argmax
q()2QZ
dq() logq(i 1)()p(ybij)
q():
These have the form of standard variational inference with the prior replaced by the previous variational
distribution q(i 1)(). This idea – combining the likelihood from a new batch of data with the previous
12
Algorithm 2 One step of the PEP algorithm at the i-th iteration, for the bi-th data partition
Compute the tilted distribution: ^p(i)
() =q(i 1)()
p(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()
Moment match: q() = proj(^p(i)
())such that Eq()(T()) =E^p(i)
()(T())
Update the posterior distribution with damping :q(i)() = 
q(i 1)()1 =(q())=
Update the approximate likelihood: t(i)
bi() =q(i)()
q(i 1)()t(i 1)
bi()
Algorithm 3 One step of the PEP algorithm, as in algorithm 2, but with alpha divergence minimization
Compute the tilted distribution: ^p(i)() =q(i 1)()p(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()
Find the posterior distribution: q(i)():= argminq()2QD[^p(i)()jjq()]
Update the approximate likelihood: t(i)
bi() =q(i)()
q(i 1)()t(i 1)
bi()
approximate posterior and projecting back to a new approximate posterior – underpins online variational
inference [Ghahramani and Attias, 2000, Sato, 2001], streaming variational inference [Broderick et al.,
2013, Bui et al., 2017b], and variational continual learning [Nguyen et al., 2018]. Early work on online VI
used conjugate models and analytic updates [Ghahramani and Attias, 2000, Sato, 2001, Broderick et al.,
2013, Bui et al., 2017b], this was followed by oﬀ-the-shelf optimization approaches for non-conjugate
models [Bui et al., 2017b] and further extended to leverage MC approximations of the local-free energy
[Nguyen et al., 2018]. Recently Zeno et al. [2018] use the variational continual learning framework of
Nguyen et al. [2018], but employ ﬁxed-point updates instead.
4.4 Power EP as a Fully Local VI Fixed Point Method
There is also an important relationship between PVI methods employing ﬁxed point updates and power
expectation propagation [Minka, 2004]. Property 6 below states that the local VI ﬁxed point equations
are recovered from the Power EP algorithm as !0.
Property 6 The damped ﬁxed point equations are precisely those returned by the PEP algorithm, shown
in algorithm 2, in the limit that !0.
Although we suspect Knowles and Minka [2011] knew of this relationship, and it is well known that
Power EP has the same ﬁxed points as VI in this case, it does not appear to be widely known that
variationally limited Power EP yields exactly the same algorithm as ﬁxed point local VI. See A.8 for
the proof.
4.5 Alpha-divergence EP as a Local VI Method with Oﬀ-the-shelf Optimization
PVI is intimately related to alpha-divergence EP. If PVI’s KL divergence is replaced by an alpha
divergence D[p()jjq()] =1
(1 )R
p() + (1 )q() p()q()1 
dwe recover the alpha-
divergence formulation of the power-EP algorithm [Minka, 2004] which encompasses the current case as
!0and EP when !1[Minka, 2001]. The updates using this formulation are shown in algorithm 3.
The alpha divergence is typically very diﬃcult to compute once more than one non-Gaussian likelihood
is included in a data group ym, meaning that for general alpha it would be appropriate to set M=N.
The variational KL is the exception as it decomposes over data points.
13
Algorithm 4 One step of the SPEP algorithm at the i-th iteration, for the bi-th data partition
Compute the tilted distribution: ^p(i)
() =q(i 1)()p(ybij)
t(i 1)()
Moment match: q() = proj(^p(i)
())such that Eq()(T()) =E^p(i)
()(T())
Update the posterior distribution with damping :q(i)() = 
q(i 1)()1 N=(q())N=
Update the approximate likelihood: t(i)=
q(i)()
p()1=N
4.6 Stochastic Power EP as a Stochastic Global VI Fixed Point Method
The stochastic power EP algorithm [Li et al., 2015] reduces the memory overhead of EP by maintaining
a single likelihood approximation that approximates the average eﬀect a likelihood has on the posterior
q() =p()t()M. Taking the variational limit of this algorithm, !0, we recover global VI M= 1
with damped simpliﬁed ﬁxed-point updates that employ a stochastic (mini-batch) approximation
[Hoﬀman et al., 2013].
Property 7 The mini-batch ﬁxed point equations are precisely those returned by the SPEP algorithm,
shown in algorithm 4 in the limit that !0.
In this way the relationship between EP and SEP is the same as the relationship between ﬁxed point
PVI and ﬁxed point mini-batch global VI (see section 3.4 where the two approaches diﬀer by removing
either an average natural parameter or a speciﬁc one). Similarly, if we altered PVI to maintain a single
average likelihood approximation, as SEP does, we would recover mini-batch global VI.
4.7 Distributed (Power) EP Methods
The convergent distributed Power EP approach of Hasenclever et al. [2017] recovers a version of PVI as
!0with convergence guarantees. The PVI approach is also similar in spirit to Gelman et al. [2014],
Hasenclever et al. [2017] who use EP to split up data sets into small parts that are amenable to MCMC.
Here we are using PVI to split up data sets so that they are amenable for optimization.
5 ImprovingFederatedLearningfor BayesianNeuralNetworksUsing
PVI
Having connected the previous literature using the unifying framework based on PVI, we will discuss
how PVI enables novel and practical algorithms to emerge. In this section, we detail how Partitioned
Variational Inference can be used for federated approximate training of Bayesian neural networks,
allowing both synchronous or lock-free asynchronous model updates across many machines.3As a
running example, consider a multiclass classiﬁcation problem with Cclasses and assume that the
training points are partitioned into Kdisjoint memory shards (or subsets). In practical federated
settings, the allocation of data points to shards is often unknown a priori, for example, the number of
data points across various shards may be unbalanced or some classes may be present only on a few
memory shards, or on one in the extreme. We ﬁrst discuss Bayesian neural networks and a global
variational approximation for training BNNs, and detail how this approximation can be used at the
shard level.
Consider a neural network that models the distribution of a target ygiven an input x,p(yj;x),
whereinclude the weights and biases in the network. To complete the model, we assign a prior p()
3Neural network models are used throughout this section and the experiment, but other models can be employed in
the same fashion as the training framework developed here is general.
14
Table 1: Variational inference schemes encompassed by the PVI framework. (See next page.) Selected
past work has been organized into four categories: global VI (PVI with M= 1), fully local PVI ( M=N),
Power EP variants, and online VI. The citation to the work is provided along with the granularity
of the method (global indicates M= 1, fully local M=N, local implies general Mcan be used).
The optimization used from the PVI perspective on this work is noted. Abbreviations used here are:
Conjugate Gradient (CG) and Monte Carlo (MC). The model class that the scheme encompasses is noted
(conjugate versus non-conjugate) along with the speciﬁc models that the scheme was tested on. Model
abbreviations are: Non-linear State-space Model (NSSM), Non-linear Factor Analysis (NFA), Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), Poisson Mixed Model (PMM), Heteroscedastic Linear Regression (HLR),
Sparse Gaussian Processes (SGPs), Graphical Model (GM), Logistic Regression (LR), Beta-binomial
(BB), Stochastic Volatility model (SV), Probit Regression (PR), Multinomial Regression (MR), Bayesian
Neural Network (BNN), Gamma factor model (GFM), Poisson Gamma Matrix Factorization (PGMF),
Mixture of Gaussians (MoG). Poisson Mixed Model (PMM), Heteroscedastic Linear Regression (HLR),
Gaussian Latent Variable (GLV). If the scheme proposed by the method has a name, this is noted in
the ﬁnal column. Abbreviations of the inference scheme are: Automatic Diﬀerentiation VI (ADVI),
Incremental VI (IVI), Non-conjugate Variational Message Passing (NC-VMP), Simpliﬁed NC-VMP
(SNC-VMP), Conjugate-Computation VI (CCVI), Power EP (PEP), Alpha-divergence PEP (ADPEP),
Convergent Power EP (CPEP), Stochastic Power EP (SPEP), Variational Continual Learning (VCL),
Bayesian Gradient Descent (BGD).
globalstochastic
mini-batchlocal
analyticsimple 
gradient
basedfixed-point
(nat. grad.)fixed-point
(nat. grad.)
simplified
Monte Carlo VI Power EP Single Pass Through Data Variational InferenceHonkela 
et al. 2010
Hensman 
et al. 2012
Sheth & Khardon 
2015, 2016aHoffman et al. 2013  
Hensman et al. 2013
Knowles 
& Minka
2004Wand
2014
Beal, 2003Sheth &
Khardon
2016b
Salimans & 
Knowles 
2013Khan et al.
2018
Blundell 
et al. 2015
Kucukelbir 
et al. 2017Salimans & 
Knowles 2013Li et al.
2015Minka 2004 
Power EP
Bui et al. 
2017b
Hasenclever 
et al. 2017
Minka 2004
Bui et al.
2017bMinka 2004
 alpha-div. 
EPBui et al. 
2018
Nyugen et al. 
2018
Ghahramani
& Attias 2000
Sato 2001
Broderick 
et al. 2013
Bui et al. 2018Winn et al.
2005
Archambeau
& Ermis,
2015Hinton and 
van Camp 1993
Models encompassed:        conjugate         low dimensional non-conjugate        high dimensional non-conjugateZeno et al. 
2018
Figure 3: The local VI framework uniﬁes prior work. The granularity of the approximation and
the optimization method employed are two fundamental algorithmic dimensions that are shown as
axes. Fixed-point updates are identical to natural gradient ascent with unit step size. The models
encompassed by each paper are indicated by the color. See 1 for more information.
15
Reference Granularity Optimization Models Name
Global VI [PVIM= 1, see section 4.1]
Beal [2003] global analytic conjugate VI
Sato [2001] global analytic conjugate (MoG)
Hinton and Van Camp [1993] global gradient ascent non-conjugate (neural network)
Honkela et al. [2010] global natural gradient (mean only) non-conj. (MoG, NSSM, NFA)
Hensman et al. [2012] global CG with natural gradient conjugate
Hensman et al. [2013] global stochastic natural gradient conjugate
Hoﬀman et al. [2013] global stochastic natural gradient conjugate SVI
Kucukelbir et al. [2017] global stochastic gradient descent non-conjugate ADVI
Salimans et al. [2013] global ﬁxed-point + MC + stochastic non-conjugate (PR, BB, SV)
Sheth et al. [2015] global simpliﬁed ﬁxed point non-conjugate (GLV)
Sheth and Khardon [2016a] global simpliﬁed ﬁxed point non-conjugate (GLV)
Sheth and Khardon [2016b] global simpliﬁed ﬁxed point + MC non-conjugate (two level)
Fully Local VI [PVIM=N, see section 4.2]
Winn et al. [2005] fully local analytic conjugate (GM) VMP
Archambeau and Ermis [2015] fully local incremental conjugate (LDA) IVI
Knowles and Minka [2011] fully local ﬁxed-point non-conjugate (LR, MR) NC-VMP
Wand [2014] fully local simpliﬁed ﬁxed-point non-conjugate (PMM, HLR) SNC-VMP
Khan and Lin [2018] local damped stochastic simpliﬁed ﬁxed-
pointnon-conjugate(LR,GFM,PGMF) CCVI
Online VI [one pass of PVI, see section 4.3]
Ghahramani and Attias [2000] fully local analytic conjugate (MoG)
Sato [2001] fully local analytic conjugate (MoG) online VB
Broderick et al. [2013] fully local analytic conjugate (LDA) streaming VI
Bui et al. [2017a] fully local analytic/LBFGS conjugate and not (SGPs)
Nguyen et al. [2018] fully local Adam non-conjugate (BNN) VCL
Zeno et al. [2018] fully local ﬁxed-point non-conjugate (BNN) BGD
Power EP [PVI when !0, see sections 4.4 to 4.7]
Minka [2004] local series ﬁxed point non-conjugate (GM) PEP
Minka [2004] local optimization ADEP
Bui et al. [2017b] local analytic/ﬁxed-point conjugate / non-conj. (GPs) PEP
Hasenclever et al. [2017] local analytic with MC non-conjugate (BNN) CPEP
Li et al. [2015] local stochastic ﬁxed point non-conjugate (LR, BNN) SPEP
Table 1: Variational inference schemes encompassed by the PVI framework. See previous page for full caption.
16
over the unknown parameters . Having speciﬁed the probability of everything, we turn the handle of
probability theory to obtain the posterior distribution,
p(jx;y) =p()p(yj;x)
p(yjx)=p()QK
k=1QNk
n=1p(yk;nj;xk;n)
p(yjx): (16)
The exact posterior above is analytically intractable and thus approximation techniques such as sampling
or deterministic methods are needed. There is a long history of research on approximate Bayesian
training of neural networks, including extended Kalman ﬁltering [Singhal and Wu, 1989], Laplace’s
approximation [MacKay, 2003], Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [Neal, 1993, 2012], variational inference
[Hinton and Van Camp, 1993, Barber and Bishop, 1998, Graves, 2011, Blundell et al., 2015, Gal
and Ghahramani, 2016], sequential Monte Carlo [de Freitas et al., 2000], expectation propagation
[Hernández-Lobato and Adams, 2015], and approximate power EP [Li et al., 2015, Hernández-Lobato
et al., 2016]. In this section, we focus on Monte Carlo variational inference methods with a mean-ﬁeld
Gaussian variational approximation [Graves, 2011, Blundell et al., 2015]. In detail, a factorized global
variational approximation, q() =Q
iN(i;i;2
i), is used to lower-bound the log marginal likelihood
as follows,
logp(yjx) = logZ
dp()p(yj;x)Z
dq() logp()p(yj;x)
q()=FGVI(q());(17)
whereFGVI(q())is the variational lower bound or the negative variational free-energy. This bound
can be expanded as follows,
FGVI(q()) = KL[q()jjp()] +KX
k=1NkX
n=1Z
dq() logp(yk;nj;xk;n): (18)
When the prior is chosen to be a Gaussian, the KL term in the bound above can be computed
analytically. In contrast, the expected log-likelihood term is not analytically tractable. However, it can
be approximated by simple Monte Carlo with the (local) reparameterization trick such that low-variance
stochastic gradients of the approximate expectation wrt the variational parameters fi;igcan be
easily obtained [Rezende et al., 2014, Kingma and Welling, 2014, Kingma et al., 2015].
The variational lower-bound above can be optimized using any oﬀ-the-shelf stochastic optimizer, and
its gradient computation can be trivially distributed across many machines. A possible synchronously
distributed schedule when using K compute nodes, each having access to a memory shard, is as follows:
(i) a central compute node passes the current q()to K workers, (ii) each worker then computes the
gradients of the expected log-likelihood of (a mini-batch of) its own data and passes the gradients
back to the central node, (iii) the central node aggregates these gradients, combines the result with
the gradient of the KL term, and performs an optimization step to obtain a new q(). These steps are
then repeated for a ﬁxed number of iterations or until convergence. However, notice that this schedule
is communication-ineﬃcient, as it requires frequent communication of the gradients and the updated
variational approximation between the central node and the K compute workers. We will next discuss
an inference scheme based on PVI that allows communication eﬃcient updates between workers that is
compatible with various scheduling schemes.
Following the PVI formulation in section 2, the approximate posterior can be rewritten using the
approximate factors, one for each memory shard, as follows,
p(jx;y)/p()KY
k=1NkY
n=1p(yk;nj;xk;n)p()KY
k=1tk() =q(); (19)
17
wheretk()approximates the contribution of data points in the k-th shard to the posterior. As discussed
in the previous sections, PVI turns the original global approximate inference task into a collection of
approximate inference tasks, i.e. for the k-th memory shard and k-th compute node, the task is to
maximize,
Fk
PVI(q()) = KL[q()jjqnk()] +NkX
n=1Z
dq() logp(yk;nj;xk;n); (20)
whereqnk() =q()=tk()is the context or eﬀective prior set by data points in other shards. Once a
new variational approximation q()is obtained, a new approximate factor can be computed accordingly,
tk() =q()=qnk(). Note that the objective for each compute node is almost identical to the GVI
objective, except the prior is now replaced by the context and the data are limited to the compute
node’s accessible data. This means any global VI implementation available on a compute node (either
using optimization, ﬁxed-point updates, or in close-formed) can be trivially modiﬁed to handle PVI.
A key additional diﬀerence to GVI is the communication frequency between the compute nodes and
the central parameter server (that holds the latest q()): a worker can decide to pass tk()back to the
central server after multiple passes through its data, after one epoch, or after just one mini-batch. This
leaves room for practitioners to choose a learning schedule that meets communication constraints. More
importantly, PVI enables various communication strategies to be deployed, for example:
Sequential PVI with only one pass through the data set: each worker, in turn, runs Global VI,
with the previous posterior being the prior/context, for the data points in its memory shard and
returns the posterior approximation to the parameter server. This posterior approximation will
then be used as the context for the next worker’s execution. Note that this is exactly equivalent
to Variational Continual Learning [Nguyen et al., 2018] and can be combined with the multihead
architecture, each head handling one task or one worker, or with episodic memory [see e.g. Zenke
et al., 2017, Nguyen et al., 2018]. This strategy is communication-eﬃcient as only a small number
of messages are required — only one up/down update is needed for each worker.
PVI with synchronous model updates: instead of sequentially updating the context distribution
and running only one worker at a time, all workers can be run in parallel. That is, each worker
occasionally sends its updated contribution to the posterior back to the parameter server. The
parameter server waits for all workers to ﬁnish before aggregating the approximate factors and
sending the new posterior back to the workers. The workers will then update their own context
distributions based on the current state of the central parameters. This process then repeats. By
analyzing the homogeneity of the data and updates across workers, heuristics could be used to
choose the learning rate for each worker and damping factor for the central parameter server —
we leave this for future work.
PVI with lock-free asynchronous updates: instead of waiting for all workers to ﬁnish training
locally, the model aggregation and update steps can be performed as soon as any worker has
ﬁnished. This strategy is particularly useful when communication is done over an unreliable
channel, the distribution of the data across diﬀerent machines is highly unbalanced, or when a
machine can be disconnected from the training procedure at any time. However, this strategy
is expected to be generally worse compared the synchronous update scheme above, since the
context/cavity distribution could be changed while a worker is running and the next parameter
update performed by this worker could overwrite the updates made by other workers, i.e. there is
the possibility of stale updates.
We demonstrate these communication strategies on a large-scale federated classiﬁcation task in
section 7.1 and highlight the advantages and potential pitfalls of PVI, GVI and various alternatives for
diﬀerent levels of data homogeneity across memory shards.
18
6 Improving Continual Learning for Sparse Gaussian Processes Using
PVI
Gaussian processes (GPs) are ﬂexible probabilistic distributions over functions that have been used in
wide variety of machine learning problems, including supervised learning [Rasmussen and Williams, 2006],
unsupervised learning [Lawrence, 2004] and reinforcement learning [Deisenroth, 2010]. The application
of GPs to more general, large-scale settings is however hindered by analytical and computational
intractabilities. As a result, a large body of active GP research aims to develop eﬃcient approximation
strategies for inference and learning in GP models. In this work, we develop an approximation based
on partitioned variational inference for GP regression and classiﬁcation in a continual learning setting.
In this setting, data arrive sequentially, either one data point at a time or in batches of a size that is
unknown a priori. An eﬃcient strategy to accurately update the model in an online fashion is thus
needed and can be used for various applications such as control [Nguyen-Tuong et al., 2009] or mapping
[O’Callaghan and Ramos, 2012].
In particular, building on recent work on pseudo-point sparse approximations [Titsias, 2009, Hensman
et al., 2015, Matthews et al., 2016, Bui et al., 2017b] and streaming approximations [Csató and Opper,
2002, Bui et al., 2017a], we develop a streaming variational approximation that approximates the
posterior distribution over both the GP latent function andthe hyperparameters for GP regression and
classiﬁcation models. Additionally, the partitioned VI view of this approximation allows just-in-time,
dynamic allocation of new pseudo-points speciﬁc to a data batch, and more eﬃcient training time
and accurate predictions in practice. We will provide a concise review of sparse approximations for
Gaussian process regression and classiﬁcation before summarizing the proposed continual learning
approach. For interested readers, see Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen [2005], Bui et al. [2017a]
for more comprehensive reviews of sparse GPs. Appendix C contains the full derivation of diﬀerent
streaming variational approaches with shared or private pseudo points, and with maximum likelihood
or variational learning strategies for the hyperparameters.
6.1 Variational inference for both latent function and hyperparameters
GivenNinput and output pairs fxn;yngN
n=1, a standard GP regression or classiﬁcation model assumes
the outputsfyngN
n=1are generated from the inputs fxngN
n=1according to yn=f(xn) +n, where
fis an unknown function that is corrupted by observation noise, for example, N(0;2
y)in the
real-valued output regression problem.4Typically,fis assumed to be drawn from a zero-mean GP
priorfGP (0;k(;j))whose covariance function depends on hyperparameters . We also place
a prior over the hyperparameters and as such inference involves ﬁnding the posterior over both f
and,p(f;jy;x), and computing the marginal likelihood p(yjx), where we have collected the inputs
and observations into vectors x=fxngN
n=1andy=fyngN
n=1respectively. This is one key diﬀerence
to the work of Bui et al. [2017b], in which only a point estimate of the hyperparameters is learned
via maximum likelihood. The dependence on the inputs of the posterior, marginal likelihood, and
other quantities will be suppressed when appropriate to lighten the notation. Exact inference in the
model considered here is analytically and computationally intractable, due to the non-linear dependency
betweenfand, and the need to perform a high dimensional integration when Nis large.
In this work, we focus on the variational free energy approximation scheme [Titsias, 2009, Matthews
et al., 2016] which is arguably the leading approximation method for many scenarios. This scheme
lower bounds the marginal likelihood of the model using a variational distribution q(f;)over the latent
4In this section, fstands for the model parameters, as denoted by in the previous sections.
19
function and the hyperparameters:
logp(yjx) = logZ
dfdp(y;f;jx)Z
dfdq(f;) logp(yjf;;x)p(fj)p()
q(f;)=F(q(f;));
whereF(q(f;))is the variational surrogate objective and can be maximized to obtain q(f;). In order
to arrive at a computationally tractable method, the approximate posterior is parameterized via a
set ofMapseudo-outputs awhich are a subset of the function values f=ff6=a;ag. Speciﬁcally, the
approximate posterior takes the following structure:
q(f;) =p(f6=aja;)q(a)q(); (21)
whereq(a)andq()are variational distributions over aandrespectively, and p(f6=aja;)is the
conditional prior distribution of the remaining latent function values. Note that while aandare
assumed to be factorized in the approximate posterior, the dependencies between the remaining latent
function values f6=aand the hyperparameters , and between f6=athemselves are retained due to the
conditional prior. This assumption leads to a critical cancellation that results in a computationally
tractable lower bound as follows:
F(q(a);q()) =Z
dfdq(f) logp(yjf;;x)p()p(aj))XXXXXXp(f6=aja;)
XXXXXXp(f6=aja;)q(a)q()
= KL[q()jjp()] Z
dq()KL[q(a)jjp(aj)]
+X
nZ
ddadfnq()q(a)p(fnja;) logp(ynjfn;;xn);
wherefn=f(xn)is the latent function value at xn. Most terms in the variational lower bound
above require computation of an expectation wrt the variational approximation q(), which is not
available in closed-form even when q()takes a simple form such as a diagonal Gaussian. However, these
expectations can be approximated by simple Monte Carlo with the reparameterization trick [Kingma
and Welling, 2014, Rezende et al., 2014]. The remaining expectations can be handled tractably, either
in closed-form or by using Gaussian quadrature.
6.2 Continual learning for streaming data with private pseudo-points
In continual learning, data arrive sequentially and revisiting previously seen data is prohibitive, and the
current variational posterior can be reused to approximate the eﬀect of the previous data on the exact
posterior. Letfx1;y1gandfx2;y2gdenote previous and new data, respectively. We ﬁrst re-interpret
the structured global approximate posterior in eq. (21) as a product of local approximate factors as
follows,
p(f;jy1;x1) =p()p(fj)p(y1jf;;x1)=Z1
=p()p(f6=aja;)p(aj)p(y1jf;;x1)=Z1
p()p(f6=aja;)t1(a)t1()g1(a)g1()
=p(f6=aja;)q1(a)q1();
whereq1(a) =t1(a)g1(a),q1() =p()t1()g1(), andt1()s andg1()s are introduced to approximate
the contribution of p(aj)andp(y1jf;;x1)to the posterior, respectively. Note that the last equation
is identical to eq. (21), but the factor representation above facilitates inference using PVI and allows
20
more ﬂexible approximations in the streaming setting. In particular, the exact posterior when both old
datay1and newly arrived data y2are included can be approximated in a similar fashion,
p(f;jy1;y2;x1;x2) =p()p(fj)p(y1jf;;x1)p(y2jf;;x2)=Z12
=p()p(f6=a;bja;b;)p(bja;)p(aj)p(y1jf;;x1)p(y2jf;;x2)=Z12
p()p(f6=a;bja;b;)t2(bja)t2()t1(a)t1()g1(a)g1()g2(b)g2()
where bare new pseudo-outputs, and t2()s andg2()s are approximate contributions of p(bja;)and
p(y2jf;;x2)to the posterior, respectively. As we have reused the approximate factors t1(a)andg1(a),
the newly introduced pseudo-points bcan be thought of as pseudo-points private to the new data. This
is the key diﬀerence of this work compared to the approach of Bui et al. [2017a], in which both old
and new data share a same set of pseudo-points. The advantages of the approach based on private
pseudo-points are potentially two-fold: (i) it is conceptually simpler to focus the approximation eﬀort to
handle the new data points while keeping the approximation for previous data ﬁxed, as a new data batch
may require only a small number of representative pseudo-points, and (ii) the number of parameters
(variational parameters and private pseudo-inputs) is much smaller, leading to arguably easier problem
to initialize and optimize.
The approximate factors t2()andg2()can be found by employing the PVI algorithm in section 2.
Alternatively, in the continual learning setting where data points do not need to be revisited, we can
convert the factor-based variational approximation above to a global variational approximation,
p(f;jy1;y2;x1;x2)p()p(f6=a;bja;b;)t2(bja)t2()t1(a)t1()g1(a)g1()g2(b)g2()
=p(f6=a;bja;b;)q2(bja)q1(a)q2()
whereq2(bja) =t2(bja)g2(b),q2() =p()t1()g1()t2()g2(), andq2(bja)andq2()are parameterized
and optimized, along with the location of b. While this does not change the ﬁxed-point solution
compared to the PVI algorithm, it allows existing sparse global VI implementations such as that in
GPﬂow [Matthews et al., 2017] to be easily extended and deployed.
7 Experiments
Having discussed the connections to the literature and developed two novel applications of PVI, we
validate the proposed methods by running a suite of continual and federated learning experiments on
Bayesian neural network and Gaussian process models.
7.1 Distributed Federated Variational Inference for Neural Networks
In this section, we demonstrate that Partitioned Variational Inference is well-suited for federated
approximate training of Bayesian neural networks, allowing both synchronous or lock-free asynchronous
model updates across many machines. In particular, we consider the MNIST ten-class classiﬁcation
problem and assume that the training points are partitioned into Kdisjoint shards. Two levels of data
homogeneity across memory shards are considered: homogeneous [or iid, e.g. each shard has training
points of all classes] and inhomogeneous [or non-iid, e.g. when K= 10, each shard has training points of
only one class]. We evaluate diﬀerent training methods using a Bayesian neural network with one hidden
layer of 200 rectiﬁed linear units. We place a diagonal standard Normal prior over the parameters,
p() =N(; 0;I), and initialize the mean of the variational approximations as suggested by Glorot
and Bengio [2010]. For distributed training methods, the data set is partitioned into 10 subsets or
shards (K= 10), and 10 compute nodes (workers) with each able to access one memory shard. The
implementation of diﬀerent inference strategies was done in Tensorﬂow [Abadi et al., 2016] and the
21
communication between workers is managed using Ray [Moritz et al., 2017]. We use Adam [Kingma
and Ba, 2014] for the inner loop optimization for partitioned, distributed methods or the outer loop
optimization for global VI, and mini-batches of 200 data points. In the next few paragraphs, we brieﬂy
detail the methods compared in this section and their results.
Global VI We ﬁrst evaluate global VI with a diagonal Gaussian variational approximation for the
weights in the neural network. In particular, it is assumed that there is only one compute node (with
either one core or ten cores) that can access the entire data set. This compute node maintains a
global variational approximation to the exact posterior, and adjusts this approximation using the noisy
gradients of the variational free-energy in eq. (18). We simulate the data distribution by sequentially
showing mini-batches that can potentially have all ten classes (iid) or that have data of only one class
(non-iid). Figures 13 and 14 in the appendix show the full performance statistics on the test set during
training for diﬀerent learning rates and data homogeneity levels. The performance depends strongly on
the learning rate, especially when the mini-batches are non-iid. Faster convergence early in training does
not guarantee a better eventual model as measured by test performance, for the iid setting. Note that
GVI for the non-iid setting can arrive at a good test error rate, albeit requiring a much smaller learning
rate and a substantially larger training time. In addition, global VI is not communication-eﬃcient, as
the global parameters are updated as often as data mini-batches are considered. The best performing
method for the iid/non-iid settings is selected from all of the learning rates considered and they are
shown in ﬁgs. 4 and 5.
Bayesian committee machine The Bayesian committee machine (BCM) is a simple baseline which
is naturally applicable to partitioned data [Tresp, 2000]. The BCM performs (approximate) inference
for each data shard independently of other data shards and aggregate the sub-posteriors at the end.
In particular, global VI with a diagonal Gaussian variational approximation is applied independently
to the data in each shard yielding approximate local posteriors fqk()gK
k=1. The aggregation step
involves multiplying KGaussian densities. The only shared information across diﬀerent members of
the committee is the prior. This baseline, therefore, assesses the beneﬁts from coordination between the
workers. We consider two prior sharing strategies as follows,
BCM — same: p(jx;y)/p()KY
k=1p(ykj;xk) =QK
k=1[p()p(ykj;xk)]
[p()]K 1QK
k=1qk()
[p()]K 1;
BCM — split: p(jx;y)/p()KY
k=1p(ykj;xk) =KY
k=1[[p()]Nk=Np(ykj;xk)]KY
k=1qk():
BCM is fully parallelizable (one worker independently performs inference for one shard) and is
communication-eﬃcient (only one round of communication is required at the end of the training).
However, there are several potential disadvantages: (i) it is not clear whether the prior sharing schemes
discussed above will over-regularize or under-regularize the network compared to the original batch
training scheme, and (ii) since each shard develops independent approximations and the model is
unidentiﬁable, it is unclear if the simple combination rules above are appropriate. For example, diﬀerent
members of the committee might learn equivalent posteriors up to a permutation of the hidden units.
Although initializing each approximate posterior qk()in the same way can mitigate this eﬀect, the
lack of a shared context is likely to be problematic. We evaluate BCM for both iid and non-iid settings,
with diﬀerent learning rates for the Adam optimizer for each worker and show the full results in ﬁgs. 15
and 16. It is perhaps surprising that BCM works well in the iid data setting, although the best error
rate of 4%is still much higher than state-of-the-art results on the MNIST classiﬁcation task ( 1%).
However, the concern above about the potential pitfalls when multiplying diﬀerent sub-posteriors is
22
validated in the non-iid setting, and in the iid setting when each worker is trained for a long time before
performing the aggregation step. The best results in both settings are selected and shown in ﬁgs. 4
and 5.
Partitioned VI As discussed in section 5, PVI is a natural ﬁt to training probabilistic models
on federated data and is ﬂexible such that various communication and scheduling strategies can be
employed. In this section, we test three approaches discussed in section 5:
Sequential PVI with only one pass through the data set: The number of training epochs and
learning rates for each worker are varied, and the full results are included in ﬁgs. 17 and 18.
The results show that while this strategy is eﬀective for the iid setting, it performs poorly in
the non-iid setting. This issue is known in the continual learning literature where incremental
learning of a single-head network is known to be challenging. Episodic memory [see e.g. Zenke
et al., 2017, Nguyen et al., 2018] or generative replay [Shin et al., 2017] is typically used to address
this problem. The performance for the best hyperparameter settings are shown in ﬁgs. 4 and 5.
PVI with synchronous model updates: In this experiment, each worker runs one epoch of Global
VI between message passing steps, and the parameter server waits for all workers to ﬁnish before
aggregating information and sending it back to the workers. We explore diﬀerent learning rates
for the inner loop optimization and various damping rates for the parameter server, and show
the full results in ﬁgs. 19 and 20. While the performance on the test set depends strongly on the
learning rate and damping factor, if these values are appropriately chosen, this update strategy
can achieve competitive performance ( <2%). By analyzing the homogeneity of the data and
updates across workers, some forms of heuristics could be used to choose the learning rate and
damping factor — we leave this for future work. We pick the best performing runs and compare
with other methods in ﬁgs. 4 and 5.
PVI with lock-free asynchronous updates: Similar to the synchronous PVI experiment, we vary
the learning rate and damping factor and include the full results in ﬁgs. 22 and 23. The test
performance of this method is generally worse compared the synchronous update scheme, since the
context/cavity distribution could be changed while a worker is running and the next parameter
update performed by this worker could overwrite the updates made by other workers. While we
do not simulate conditions that favour this scheduling scheme such that unreliable communication
channels or unbalanced data across memory shards, we expect this strategy to perform well
compared to other methods in these scenarios. The best hyperparameters are selected and their
performance are shown in ﬁgs. 4 and 5.
Discussion The best performance for each method discussed above are shown in ﬁgs. 4 and 5,
demonstrating the accuracy-training time and accuracy-communication cost frontiers. In the iid data
setting (ﬁg. 4), distributed training methods can achieve comparable performance in the same training
time compared to that of global VI. However, methods based on data partitioning are much more
communication-eﬃcient, for example, PVI-sync uses about 10 times fewer messages than GVI when both
methods attain a 3 %test error. The results for PVI-seq with one pass through the data demonstrates
its eﬃciency, but highlights the need to revisit data multiple times to obtain better error rate and
log-likelihood. BCM shows promising performance, but is outperformed by all other methods, suggesting
that communication between workers and setting the right approximate prior (context) for each partition
are crucial.
Figure 5 shows the non-iid data regime is substantially more challenging, as simple training methods
including BCM and PVI-seq with one pass perform poorly and other distributed methods require more
23
extreme hyperparameter settings (e.g. much smaller learning rate and higher damping factor), much
longer training time, and higher communication cost to obtain a performance comparable to that in the
iid regime. We note that the performance of PVI is signiﬁcantly better than a recent result by Zhao et al.
[2018], who achieved a 10% error rate on the same non-iid data setting. Moreover, unlike this work, we
use a fully-connected neural network (rather than a convolutional one) and do not communicate data
between the workers (no data synchronization). As in the iid setting, the performance of PVI-async is
hindered by stale updates, compared to PVI-sync, despite early faster convergence. While GVI with 10
cores is the best performer in terms of predictive performance, it is the least communication-eﬃcient due
to the need to frequently pass gradients between the central parameter server and compute nodes. This,
however, suggests that the performance of PVI could be further improved by more frequent updates
between workers, essentially trading oﬀ the communication cost for more accurate prediction.
24
210100error /%BCM - split prior, 10 subsets
BCM - same prior, 10 subsets
GVI - 1 core
GVI - 10 cores
PVI - seq, one pass, 10 workers
PVI - async, 10 workers
PVI - sync, 10 workers
100101102103104
train time /s10−1100nll /nat
(a)Error and NLL vs train time
210100error /%
100101102103104105
[worker !server] communication messages10 1100nll /natBCM - split prior, 10 subsets
BCM - same prior, 10 subsets
GVI - 1 core
GVI - 10 cores
PVI - seq, one pass, 10 workers
PVI - async, 10 workers
PVI - sync, 10 workers (b)Error and NLL vs communication cost
Figure 4: Performance on the test set in the federated MNIST experiment with an iid distribution of training points across ten workers. The test performance
is measured using the classiﬁcation error [error] and the negative log-likelihood [nll], and for both measures, lower is better. All methods are assessed using the
performance vs train time and performance vs communication cost plots — closer to the bottom left of the plots is better. Methods used for benchmarking are:
Bayesian Committee Machines (BCM) with the standard Normal prior [same] and with a weakened prior [split], Global VI (GVI) with one and ten compute cores, PVI
with sequential updates and only one pass through the data [equivalent to Variational Continual Learning], PVI with lock-free asynchronous updates (PVI - async),
and PVI with synchronous updates (PVI - sync). For ease of presentation, the x-axes for the plots start at 1. See text for more details. Best viewed in colour.
25
(a)Error and NLL vs train time
 (b)Error and NLL vs communication cost
Figure 5: Performance on the test set in the federated MNIST experiment with a non-iid distribution of training points across ten workers, i.e. each worker has access
to digits of only one class. The test performance is measured using the classiﬁcation error [error] and the negative log-likelihood [nll], and for both measures, lower is
better. All methods are assessed using the performance vs train time and performance vs communication cost plots — closer to the bottom left of the plots is better.
Methods used for benchmarking are: Bayesian Committee Machines (BCM) with the standard Normal prior [same] and with a weakened prior [split], Global VI (GVI)
with one and ten compute cores, PVI with sequential updates and only one pass through the data [equivalent to Variational Continual Learning], PVI with lock-free
asynchronous updates (PVI - async), and PVI with synchronous updates (PVI - sync). For ease of presentation, the x-axes for the plots start at 1. See text for more
details. Best viewed in colour.
26
7.2 Improving Continual Learning for Sparse Gaussian Processes
We evaluate the performance of the continual learning method for sparse Gaussian process models
discussed in section 6 on a toy classiﬁcation problem and a real-world regression problem. The diﬀerent
inference strategies were implemented in Tensorﬂow [Abadi et al., 2016] and GPﬂow [Matthews et al.,
2017].
7.2.1 A comparison on a toy data set
A toy streaming data set was created using the bananadata set, which comprises 400 two-dimensional
inputs and corresponding binary targets. The data set is ﬁrst ordered using one input dimension
and then split into three equal batches. We consider two sparse variational approaches for inferring
the latent function with 10 pseudo-points for each batch: (i) maximum-likelihood estimation for the
hyperparameters — this is similar to the method of Bui et al. [2017a] but using private pseudo-points,
as described in appendix C, and (ii) online variational inference for the hyperparameters, as discussed
in section 6. The key results are shown in ﬁg. 6, which includes the predictions after observing each
data batch and the (distributional) hyperparameter estimates for both methods. We also include the
histograms of the hyperparameter samples obtained by running MCMC for both the latent function
and hyperparameters on the whole data set. As expected, the sparse variational methods underestimate
the width of the distributions over the hyperparameters. The maximum-likelihood estimates for the
hyperparameters tend to be smaller and to change faster when moving from one batch to another
compared the VI estimates. Consequently, the prediction using the ML hyperparameters tends to have
sharper decision boundaries. We include in appendix C a failure case of the ML approach where the
hyperparameter values are overﬁtto a data batch, while the VI approach is more robust and maintains
better prediction quality.
7.2.2 Learning inverse dynamics of a robot arm
We next test the proposed method on learning inverse dynamics of a robot arm. The data set is
generated using a Barrett WAM arm with seven degrees-of-freedom — seven joints to which control
torques can be applied and the joints’ angles, speeds and accelerations can be recorded accordingly
[Nguyen-Tuong et al., 2009]. The aim is to learn the inverse dynamics of the arm, i.e. to accurately
predict the forces used at diﬀerent joints given the joints’ current characteristics. We treat this task as
a regression problem with 7 independent outputs and 21 inputs. The data set consists of 12,000 points
for training and 3,000 points for prediction.
To simulate the streaming setting, we ﬁrst sort the data points using a joint’s location and form
24 batches of 500 points each. As there are seven joints in the arm, seven streaming data sets were
created, each corresponding to one joint being used for sorting. For the proposed method in section 6,
10 pseudo-points are allocated and optimized for each batch, and as such, there are 240 pseudo-points
in total at the end of training. We predict on the test set after sequentially showing a data batch to the
model and compute the standardized mean squared errors (SMSEs). The results, averaged over multiple
runs corresponding to diﬀerent inputs used for sorting, are shown in ﬁg. 7. Two additional methods were
considered: (i) full GP with limited memory of 1500 data points, retrained from scratch after seeing
each data batch, and (ii) streaming sparse GPs using variational inference for both latent function and
hyperparameters with 240 pseudo-points being shared over all batches and re-optimized after every
batch. For both sparse GP methods, online variational inference is used for the hyperparameters. The
results demonstrate the proposed method with private pseudo-points is most eﬀective and stable during
training among all methods considered. For example, for the third degree-of-freedom, the ﬁnal SMSEs
were 0:100+ 0:004for the proposed method with private pseudo-points, 0:313+ 0:079for the method
with global pseudo-points, and 1:021+ 0:113for exact GP with limited memory. While the method
27
Figure 6: Experimental results on a toy streaming data set: predictions after sequentially observing
diﬀerent data batches [left] and corresponding hyperparameter estimates [right]. Three methods were
considered for this task: MCMC for both the latent function ( f) and hyperparameters (hypers) with no
sparsiﬁcation, variational inference for both fand hypers with inducing points, and sparse variational
inference for fand maximum likelihood estimation for hypers. Best viewed in colour.
with shared pseudo-points has more pseudo-points for earlier batches and is expected to perform better
theoretically, this experiment shows its inferior performance due to the need to reinitialize and optimize
all pseudo-points at every batch. The full GP with limited memory approach performs poorly and
exhibits forgetting as more batches arrived and old data are excluded from the memory. In addition,
we also tried the streaming inference scheme of Bui et al. [2017a], which only retains a point estimate
of the hyperparameters after each batch, but this did not perform well, demonstrating that being
distributional over the hyperparameters is crucial.
8 Conclusion
This paper provided a general and unifying view of variational inference, Partitioned Variational
Inference, for probabilistic models. We showed that the PVI framework ﬂexibly subsumes many existing
variational inference methods as special cases and allows a wealth of techniques to be connected. We
also demonstrated how PVI allows novel algorithmic developments and practical applications. This is
illustrated through the development of a streaming variational inference scheme for Gaussian process
models and a communication eﬃcient algorithm for training Bayesian neural networks on federated
data.
28
0.20.40.60.81.01.2SMSEDOF = 1
0.00.10.20.30.40.5DOF = 2
0.20.40.60.81.01.2DOF = 3
0.20.40.60.81.01.2DOF = 4
0 10 20
batch0.250.500.751.001.251.50SMSEDOF = 5
0 10 20
batch0.51.01.52.02.5DOF = 6
0 10 20
batch0.51.01.52.02.5DOF = 7streaming, private u streaming, shared u full, limited mem.Figure 7: Experimental results of learning inverse dynamics of a robot arm, i.e. predicting the forces
applied to the joints of the arm given the locations, speeds, and accelerations of the joints. Three
methods were considered for this task: streaming sparse variational GP with private pseudo-points,
streaming sparse variational GP with shared pseudo-points, and full GP with limited memory. Full
details are included in the text. Best viewed in colour.
One of the key contributions of this work is the connection of deterministic local message passing
methods with global optimization-based schemes. Each of these diﬀerent branches of approximate
inference has been arguably developed exclusively of each other, for example, existing probabilistic
programming toolkits tend to work primarily with one approach but not both [see e.g. Tran et al., 2017,
Minka et al., 2018]. This paper suggests these methods are inter-related and practitioners could beneﬁt
from a uniﬁed framework, i.e. there are ways to expand the existing probabilistic programming packages
to gracefully handle both approaches. Additionally, the PVI framework could be used to automatically
choose a granularity level and an optimization scheme that potentially oﬀer a better inference method
for the task or the model at hand. It is, however, unclear how ﬂexible variational approximations such
as mixtures of exponential family distributions [see e.g. Sudderth et al., 2010] or normalizing ﬂows
[Rezende and Mohamed, 2015] can be eﬃciently and tractably accommodated in the PVI framework.
We leave these directions as future work.
The experiments in section 7.1 demonstrated that PVI is well-suited to learning with decentralized
29
data. Deployment of PVI in this setting is practical as its implementation only requires a straightforward
modiﬁcation of existing global VI implementations. We have also explored how this algorithm allows
data parallelism — each local worker stores a complete copy of the model — and communication eﬃcient,
uncertainty-aware updates between workers. A potential future extension of the proposed approach is
model parallelism. That is, in addition to decentralizing the data and computation across the workers,
the model itself is partitioned. As commonly done in many deep learning training algorithms, model
parallelism could be achieved by assigning the parameters (and computation) of diﬀerent layers of the
network to diﬀerent devices. Another potential research direction is coordinator-free, peer-to-peer only
communication between workers. This could be achieved by a worker passing each update to several
randomly selected other workers, who then apply the changes, rather than to a central parameter server.
References
Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey Dean, Matthieu
Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoﬀrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. Tensorﬂow: a system for large-scale
machine learning. In Proceedings of the 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation , 2016.
Cedric Archambeau and Beyza Ermis. Incremental variational inference for latent Dirichlet allocation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.05016 , 2015.
David Barber and Christopher M. Bishop. Ensemble learning in Bayesian neural networks. In Neural
Networks and Machine Learning , 1998.
Matthew James Beal. Variational algorithms for approximate Bayesian inference . PhD thesis, UCL,
2003.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , 3(Jan):993–1022, 2003.
Charles Blundell, Julien Cornebise, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Daan Wierstra. Weight uncertainty in
neural network. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1613–1622, 2015.
Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar
Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for privacy-
preserving machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security , pages 1175–1191. ACM, 2017.
Tamara Broderick, Nicholas Boyd, Andre Wibisono, Ashia C. Wilson, and Michael I. Jordan. Streaming
variational Bayes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2013.
Thang D. Bui, Cuong V. Nguyen, and Richard E. Turner. Streaming sparse Gaussian process approxi-
mations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017a.
Thang D. Bui, Josiah Yan, and Richard E. Turner. A unifying framework for Gaussian process pseudo-
point approximations using power expectation propagation. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
18(104):1–72, 2017b.
Arslan Chaudhry, Puneet K Dokania, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip HS Torr. Riemannian walk
forincrementallearning: Understandingforgettingandintransigence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.10112 ,
2018.
30
Jianmin Chen, Xinghao Pan, Rajat Monga, Samy Bengio, and Rafal Jozefowicz. Revisiting distributed
synchronous SGD. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00981 , 2016.
Lehel Csató and Manfred Opper. Sparse online Gaussian processes. Neural Computation , 2002.
Nando de Freitas, Mahesan Niranjan, Andrew H. Gee, and Arnaud Doucet. Sequential Monte Carlo
methods to train neural network models. Neural Computation , 2000.
Jeﬀrey Dean, Greg Corrado, Rajat Monga, Kai Chen, Matthieu Devin, Mark Mao, Andrew Senior,
Paul Tucker, Ke Yang, Quoc V Le, et al. Large scale distributed deep networks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1223–1231, 2012.
Marc Peter Deisenroth. Eﬃcient reinforcement learning using Gaussian processes . PhD thesis, University
of Cambridge, 2010.
Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The algorithmic foundations of diﬀerential privacy. Foundations and
Trends Rin Theoretical Computer Science , 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.
Timo Flesch, Jan Balaguer, Ronald Dekker, Hamed Nili, and Christopher Summerﬁeld. Comparing
continual task learning in minds and machines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115
(44):E10313–E10322, 2018.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Representing model
uncertainty in deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2016.
Andrew Gelman, Aki Vehtari, Pasi Jylänki, Christian Robert, Nicolas Chopin, and John P Cunningham.
Expectation propagation as a way of life. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.4869 , 2014.
Zoubin Ghahramani and H. Attias. Online variational Bayesian learning. In NIPS Workshop on Online
Learning , 2000.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep feedforward neural
networks. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 249–256, 2010.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Da Xiao, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An empirical
investigation of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based neural networks. In International Conference
on Learning Representations , 2014.
Alex Graves. Practical variational inference for neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2011.
Leonard Hasenclever, Stefan Webb, Thibaut Lienart, Sebastian Vollmer, Balaji Lakshminarayanan,
Charles Blundell, and Yee Whye Teh. Distributed bayesian learning with stochastic natural gradient
expectation propagation and the posterior server. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(106):
1–37, 2017. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/16-478.html .
TylerLHayes, Ronald Kemker, NathanDCahill, andChristopherKanan. Newmetricsandexperimental
paradigms for continual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshops , pages 2031–2034, 2018.
James Hensman, Magnus Rattray, and Neil D. Lawrence. Fast variational inference in the conjugate
exponential family. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 2888–2896, 2012.
James Hensman, Nicolo Fusi, and Neil D Lawrence. Gaussian processes for big data. In Uncertainty in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , page 282, 2013.
31
James Hensman, Alexander G. D. G. Matthews, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Scalable variational Gaussian
process classiﬁcation. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2015.
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato and Ryan P. Adams. Probabilistic backpropagation for scalable learning
of Bayesian neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2015.
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Yingzhen Li, Mark Rowland, Daniel Hernández-Lobato, Thang D.
Bui, and Richard E. Turner. Black-box -divergence minimization. In International Conference on
Machine Learning , 2016.
Geoﬀrey E Hinton and Drew Van Camp. Keeping the neural networks simple by minimizing the
description length of the weights. In Conference on Computational Learning Theory , pages 5–13,
1993.
Matthew D Hoﬀman, David M Blei, Chong Wang, and John Paisley. Stochastic variational inference.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 14(1):1303–1347, 2013.
Antti Honkela, Tapani Raiko, Mikael Kuusela, Matti Tornio, and Juha Karhunen. Approximate
Riemannian conjugate gradient learning for ﬁxed-form variational bayes. Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 11(Nov):3235–3268, 2010.
Tommi S Jaakkola and Michael I Jordan. Improving the mean ﬁeld approximation via the use of
mixture distributions. In Learning in graphical models , pages 163–173. Springer, 1998.
Mohammad E Khan, Pierre Baqué, François Fleuret, and Pascal Fua. Kullback-Leibler proximal
variational inference. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 3402–3410, 2015.
Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan and Wu Lin. Conjugate-computation variational inference : Converting
variational inference in non-conjugate models to inferences in conjugate models. In International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2018.
Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan, Reza Babanezhad, Wu Lin, Mark Schmidt, and Masashi Sugiyama. Faster
stochastic variational inference using proximal-gradient methods with general divergence functions.
InConference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 319–328, 2016.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2014.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational Bayes. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2014.
Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Variational dropout and the local reparameteri-
zation trick. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 2575–2583, 2015.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A.
Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis,
Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 2017.
David A. Knowles and Tom Minka. Non-conjugate variational message passing for multinomial and
binary regression. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1701–1709, 2011.
Alp Kucukelbir, Dustin Tran, Rajesh Ranganath, Andrew Gelman, and David M Blei. Automatic
diﬀerentiation variational inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(1):430–474, 2017.
32
Neil D Lawrence. Gaussian process latent variable models for visualisation of high dimensional data. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 329–336, 2004.
Yingzhen Li, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, and Richard E. Turner. Stochastic expectation propagation.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 2323–2331, 2015.
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. In European Conference on Computer
Vision, 2016.
Vincenzo Lomonaco and Davide Maltoni. Core50: a new dataset and benchmark for continuous object
recognition. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 17–26, 2017.
David JC MacKay. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms . Cambridge University Press,
2003.
Alexander G. D. G. Matthews, James Hensman, Richard E Turner, and Zoubin Ghahramani. On
sparse variational methods and the Kullback-Leibler divergence between stochastic processes. In
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2016.
Alexander G De G Matthews, Mark Van Der Wilk, Tom Nickson, Keisuke Fujii, Alexis Boukouvalas,
Pablo León-Villagrá, Zoubin Ghahramani, and James Hensman. GPﬂow: A Gaussian process library
using TensorFlow. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(1):1299–1304, 2017.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
sequential learning problem. Psychology of Learning and Motivation , 1989.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
Communication-eﬃcient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In International Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 1273–1282, 2017.
Lars Mescheder, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Adversarial variational bayes: Unifying
variational autoencoders and generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Machine
Learning , pages 2391–2400, 2017.
T. Minka, J.M. Winn, J.P. Guiver, Y. Zaykov, D. Fabian, and J. Bronskill. /Infer.NET 0.3, 2018.
Microsoft Research Cambridge. http://dotnet.github.io/infer.
Thomas P Minka. Expectation propagation for approximate Bayesian inference. In Conference on
Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 362–369, 2001.
Thomas P. Minka. Power EP. Technical report, Microsoft Research Cambridge, 2004.
Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, William
Paul, Michael I Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Ray: A distributed framework for emerging AI applications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05889 , 2017.
Radford M. Neal. Bayesian learning via stochastic dynamics. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pages 475–482, 1993.
Radford M Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks , volume 118. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2012.
Cuong V. Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D. Bui, and Richard E. Turner. Variational continual learning.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
33
Duy Nguyen-Tuong, Jan R Peters, and Matthias Seeger. Local Gaussian process regression for real
time online model learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1193–1200,
2009.
Manfred Opper. Online learning in neural networks. chapter A Bayesian Approach to Online Learning,
pages 363–378. Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Simon T O’Callaghan and Fabio T Ramos. Gaussian process occupancy maps. The International
Journal of Robotics Research , 31(1):42–62, 2012.
Neal Parikh and Stephen Boyd. Proximal algorithms. Foundations and Trends Rin Optimization , 1(3):
127–239, 2014.
Joaquin Quiñonero-Candela and Carl E. Rasmussen. A unifying view of sparse approximate Gaussian
process regression. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 2005.
Rajesh Ranganath, Dustin Tran, and David Blei. Hierarchical variational models. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pages 324–333, 2016.
GarveshRaskuttiandSayanMukherjee. Theinformationgeometryofmirrordescent. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory , 61(3):1451–1457, March 2015.
Carl E. Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning . The
MIT Press, 2006.
Roger Ratcliﬀ. Connectionist models of recognition memory: Constraints imposed by learning and
forgetting functions. Psychological Review , 1990.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing ﬂows. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1530–1538, 2015.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and
approximate inference in deep generative models. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
pages 1278–1286, 2014.
Tim Salimans and David A Knowles. Fixed-form variational posterior approximation through stochastic
linear regression. Bayesian Analysis , 8(4):837–882, 2013.
Tim Salimans, David A Knowles, et al. Fixed-form variational posterior approximation through
stochastic linear regression. Bayesian Analysis , 8(4):837–882, 2013.
Tim Salimans, Diederik Kingma, and Max Welling. Markov chain Monte Carlo and variational inference:
Bridging the gap. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1218–1226, 2015.
Hugh Salimbeni, Stefanos Eleftheriadis, and James Hensman. Natural gradients in practice: Non-
conjugate variational inference in Gaussian process models. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics , 2018.
Masa-Aki Sato. Online model selection based on the variational Bayes. Neural Computation , 2001.
Jeﬀrey C. Schlimmer and Douglas Fisher. A case study of incremental concept induction. In The
National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 1986.
Steven L Scott, Alexander W Blocker, Fernando V Bonassi, Hugh A Chipman, Edward I George, and
Robert E McCulloch. Bayes and big data: The consensus Monte Carlo algorithm. International
Journal of Management Science and Engineering Management , 11(2):78–88, 2016.
34
Ari Seﬀ, Alex Beatson, Daniel Suo, and Han Liu. Continual learning in generative adversarial nets.
arXiv:1705.08395 , 2017.
Rishit Sheth and Roni Khardon. A ﬁxed-point operator for inference in variational Bayesian latent
Gaussian models. In Arthur Gretton and Christian C. Robert, editors, International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , volume 51 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages
761–769, Cadiz, Spain, 09–11 May 2016a. PMLR.
Rishit Sheth and Roni Khardon. Monte carlo structured SVI for non-conjugate models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.03957 , 2016b.
Rishit Sheth, Yuyang Wang, and Roni Khardon. Sparse variational inference for generalized GP models.
In Francis Bach and David Blei, editors, International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 37,
pages 1302–1311, 2015.
Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
replay. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 2990–2999, 2017.
Sharad Singhal and Lance Wu. Training multilayer perceptrons with the extended Kalman algorithm.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 1989.
Alex J. Smola, S.V.N. Vishwanathan, and Eleazar Eskin. Laplace propagation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2004.
Erik B Sudderth, Alexander T Ihler, Michael Isard, William T Freeman, and Alan S Willsky. Nonpara-
metric belief propagation. Communications of the ACM , 53(10):95–103, 2010.
Richard S. Sutton and Steven D. Whitehead. Online learning with random representations. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , 1993.
The Royal Society. Machine learning: The power and promise of computers that learn by example.
Technical report, The Royal Society, 2017.
Lucas Theis and Matthew D Hoﬀman. A trust-region method for stochastic variational inference with
applications to streaming data. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2015.
Tijmen Tieleman and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Lecture 6.5—RmsProp: Divide the gradient by a running
average of its recent magnitude. COURSERA: Neural Networks for Machine Learning, 2012.
Michalis K. Titsias. Variational learning of inducing variables in sparse Gaussian processes. In
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 567–574, 2009.
Dustin Tran, Matthew D. Hoﬀman, Rif A. Saurous, Eugene Brevdo, Kevin Murphy, and David M. Blei.
Deep probabilistic programming. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017.
Volker Tresp. A Bayesian committee machine. Neural computation , 12(11):2719–2741, 2000.
Richard E. Turner and Maneesh Sahani. Two problems with variational expectation maximisation for
time-series models. In D. Barber, T. Cemgil, and S. Chiappa, editors, Bayesian Time series models ,
chapter 5, pages 109–130. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Matt P. Wand. Fully simpliﬁed multivariate Normal updates in non-conjugate variational message
passing. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 15:1351–1369, 2014.
35
Bo Wang and DM Titterington. Lack of consistency of mean ﬁeld and variational Bayes approximations
for state space models. Neural Processing Letters , 20(3):151–170, 2004.
Xiangyu Wang and David B Dunson. Parallelizing MCMC via Weierstrass sampler. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.4605 , 2013.
John Winn and Tom Minka. Probabilistic programming with Infer.NET. Machine Learning Summer
School, 2009.
John Winn, Christopher M. Bishop, and Tommi Jaakkola. Variational message passing. Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 6:661–694, 2005.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3987–3995, 2017.
Chen Zeno, Itay Golan, Elad Hoﬀer, and Daniel Soudry. Bayesian gradient descent: Online variational
Bayes learning with increased robustness to catastrophic forgetting and weight pruning, 2018.
Sixin Zhang, Anna E Choromanska, and Yann LeCun. Deep learning with elastic averaging SGD. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 685–693, 2015.
Yue Zhao, Meng Li, Liangzhen Lai, Naveen Suda, Damon Civin, and Vikas Chandra. Federated learning
with non-IID data, 2018.
36
A Proofs
A.1 Relating Local KL minimization to Local Free-energy Minimization: Proof
of Property 1
Substituting the tilted distribution bp(i)()into the KL divergence yields,
KL
q()kbp(i)()
=Z
dq() logq()bZit(i 1)
bi()
q(i 1)()p(ybij)= logbZi Z
dq() logq(i 1)()p(ybij)
q()t(i 1)
bi():
HenceF(i)(q()) = logbZi KL 
q()kbp(i)()
.
A.2 Showing Valid normalization of q(): Proof of Property 2
This property holds for i= 0. By induction, assuming q(i 1)() =p()Q
mt(i 1)
m(), we have:
p()Y
mt(i)
m() =p()t(i)
bi()Y
m6=bit(i)
m() =p()q(i)()
q(i 1)()t(i 1)
bi()Y
m6=bit(i 1)
m()
=q(i)()
q(i 1)()p()Y
mt(i 1)
m() =q(i)():
Hence, the property holds for all i.
A.3 Maximizationoflocalfree-energiesimpliesmaximizationofglobalfree-energy:
Proof of Property 3
(a) We have:
X
mFm(q()) =X
mZ
dq() logp(ymj)
tm()=Z
dq() logp()Q
mp(ynj)
p()Q
mtm()=F(q()):
(b)Letqand
qbethevariationalparametersof q()andq()respectively. Wecanwrite q() =q(;q)
andq() =q(;
q) =p()Q
mtm(;
q). First, we show that at convergence, the derivative of the
global free-energies equals the sum of the derivatives of the local free-energies. The derivative of the
local free-energyFm(q())w.r.t.qis:
dFm(q())
dq=d
dqZ
dq(;q) logq(;
q)p(ymj)
q(;q)tm(;q)
=d
dqZ
dq(;q) logp(ymj)
tm(;q)+d
dqZ
dq(;q) logq(;
q)
q(;q)
=d
dqZ
dq(;q) logp(ymj)
tm(;q)+Z
ddq(;q)
dqlogq(;
q)
q(;q)  :0Z
ddq(;q)
dq:
Thus, at convergence when q=
q,
dFm(q())
dq
q=q=d
dqZ
dq(;q) logp(ymj)
tm(;q)
q=q:
37
Summing both sides over all m,
X
mdFm(q())
dq
q=q=d
dqZ
dq(;q) logQ
mp(ymj)Q
mtm(;q)
q=q
=d
dqZ
dq(;q) logp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q)
q=q:
Now consider the derivative of the global free-energy F(q()):
dF(q())
dq=d
dqZ
dq(;q) logp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q)
=Z
ddq(;q)
dqlogp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q)  :0Z
ddq(;q)
dq:
Hence,
dF(q())
dq
q=q=Z
ddq(;q)
dqlogp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q)
q=q=X
mdFm(q())
dq
q=q:
For allm, sinceq() = argmaxq()2QFm(q()), we havedFm(q())
dq
q=q= 0, which implies:
dF(q())
dq
q=q=X
mdFm(q())
dq
q=q= 0:
Thus,q()is an extremum of F(q()).
Now we show that q()is a maximum of F(q())by considering the Hessiand2F(q())
dqd|
qof the
global free-energy at convergence. Similar to the derivative case, we now show that the Hessian of the
global free-energies equals the sum of the Hessians of the local free-energies. The Hessian of the local
free-energyFm(q())w.r.t.qis:
d2Fm(q())
dqd|
q=d2
dqd|
qZ
dq(;q) logq(;
q)p(ymj)
q(;q)tm(;q)
=d2
dqd|
qZ
dq(;q) logp(ymj)
tm(;q)+d2
dqd|
qZ
dq(;q) logq(;
q)
q(;q)
=d2
dqd|
qZ
dq(;q) logp(ymj)
tm(;q)+Z
dd2q(;q)
dqd|
qlogq(;
q)
q(;q)
 
 :0d
dqZ
ddq(;q)
d|
q:
At convergence when q=
q,
d2Fm(q())
dqd|
q
q=q=d2
dqd|
qZ
dq(;q) logp(ymj)
tm(;q)
q=q:
Summing both sides over all m,
X
md2Fm(q())
dqd|
q
q=q=d2
dqd|
qZ
dq(;q) logQ
mp(ymj)Q
mtm(;q)
q=q
=d2
dqd|
qZ
dq(;q) logp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q)
q=q:
38
Now consider the Hessian of the global free-energy F(q()):
d2F(q())
dqd|
q=d2
dqd|
qZ
dq(;q) logp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q)
=Z
dd2q(;q)
dqd|
qlogp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q) 
 :0d
dqZ
ddq(;q)
d|
q:
Hence,
d2F(q())
dqd|
q
q=q=Z
dd2q(;q)
dqd|
qlogp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q)
q=q=X
md2Fm(q())
dqd|
q
q=q:
For allm, sinceq() =argmaxq()2QFm(q()), the Hessiand2Fm(q())
dqd|
q
q=qis negative deﬁnite, which
implies that the Hessiand2F(q())
dqd|
q
q=qof the global free-energy is also negative deﬁnite. Therefore,
q()is a maximum of F(q()).
A.4 Derivation of ﬁxed point equations (property 4)
Assume that the approximate likelihoods ftm()gM
m=1are in the un-normalized exponential family. That
is,tm() =exp(|
mT() +cm)for some constant cm. In this section we absorb the constant into the
natural parameters |
m [cm;|
m]and add a corresponding unit element into the suﬃcient statistics
T()| [1;T()|]. To lighten notation we still denote the suﬃcient statistic vector as T()so ,
tm() =tm(;m) = exp(|
mT()); (22)
wheremis the natural parameters and T()is the augmented suﬃcient statistics. We also assume that
the priorp()and the variational distributions q(i)()are normalized exponential family distributions.
To derive the ﬁxed point updates for the local variational inference algorithm, we consider maximizing
thelocalvariationalfreeenergy F(i)(q())in(2). Assumingthatatiteration i, thevariationaldistribution
q(i 1)()obtained from the previous iteration has the form:
q(i 1)() = exp(|
prevT() A(prev)); (23)
and the target distribution q()that we optimize has the form:
q() = exp(|
qT() A(q)); (24)
whereA()is the log-partition function. Let =prev q (i 1)
bi, we can writeF(i)(q())as:
F(i)(q()) =A(q) A(prev) +Eq(logp(ybij)) +|Eq(T()):
Take the derivative of F(i)(q())w.r.t.qand note thatdA(q)
dq= Eq(T()), we have:
dF(i)(q())
dq=d
dqEq(logp(ybij)) +d2A(q)
dqdq:
Set this derivative to zero, we obtain:
q=C 1d
dqEq(logp(ybij)) +prev (i 1)
bi; (25)
39
where C:=d2A(q)
dqdq=covq()[T()T|()]is the Fisher Information. Note that from Property 2,
q=0+P
m6=bi(i 1)
m +(i)
biandprev=0+P
m(i 1)
m, where0is the natural parameters for the
priorp(). Hence, from (25), a ﬁxed point update for Algorithm 1 only needs to update (i)
bilocally
using:
(i)
bi=C 1d
dqEq(logp(ybij)): (26)
The Fisher Information can be written as C=dq
dqwhereq=Eq(T())is the mean parameter of q().
This leads to a cancellation of the Fisher information,
(i)
bi=d
dqEq(logp(ybij)): (27)
A.5 Equivalence of local and global ﬁxed-points: Proof of property 5
Here we show that running parallel ﬁxed-point updates of local-VI with Mdata groups has equivalent
dynamics for q()as running the ﬁxed points for batch VI ( M= 1). The local-VI ﬁxed point updates
(property 4) are given by,
(i)
bi=d
dq(i 1)Eq(i 1)(logp(ybij)): (28)
Here we have explicitly denoted the dependence of the approximate posterior on the iteration number i
as the dynamics of this is the focus. When M=Nand a parallel ﬁxed point update of all the natural
parameters,f(i)
ngN
n=1, is performed, the natural parameters of q()are updated as follows,
(i)
q=0+MX
m=1(i)
n=0+MX
m=1d
dq(i 1)Eq(i 1)(logp(ybij))
=0+NX
n=1d
dq(i 1)Eq(i 1)(logp(ynj)): (29)
Here, in the last line, we have used the fact that the data are independent conditioned on . Now
consider application of the ﬁxed-point updates to the batch case ( M= 1)
(i)
q=0+=0+d
dq(i 1)Eq(logp(yj)) =0+NX
n=1d
dq(i 1)Eq(i 1)(logp(ynj))(30)
Therefore the updates for q()are identical in the two cases. Naïve implementation of local-VI requires
Msets of natural parameters to be maintained, whereas parallel updating means this is unnecessary,
but equivalent to ﬁxed-point global VI.
A.6 Relationsbetweenmethodsemployingstochasticapproximationofﬁxed-points
/ natural gradient updates
The damped simpliﬁed ﬁxed-point updates for global VI are,
(i)
q= (1 )(i 1)
q +
0+d
dqEq(logp(yj))
: (31)
40
Hoﬀman et al. [2013], Sheth and Khardon [2016b] employ stochastic mini-batch approximation of
Eq(logp(yj)) =P
nEq()(logp(ynj)) =NEpdata(y);q()(logp(ynj))by sub-sampling the data distribu-
tionyliidpdata(y)wherepdata(y) =1
NPN
n=1(y yn). This approximation yields,
(i)
q= (1 )(i 1)
q +
0+Ld
dqEq(logp(ylj))
: (32)
Where ylare a mini-batch containing N=Ldata points. Li et al. [2015] show that their stochastic power
EP algorithm recovers precisely these same updates when !0(this is related to property 6). The
relation to EP-like algorithms can be made more explicit by writing 32 as
(i)
q=(i 1)
q +0d
dqEq(logp(ylj)) (i 1)
like=L
: (33)
Where0=Lis a rescaled learning rate and (i 1)
like=(i 1)
q (i 1)
0is the portion of the approximate
posterior natural parameters that approximates the likelihoods. As such, (i 1)
like=Lis the contribution a
mini-batch likelihood makes on average to the posterior. So, interpreting the update in these terms,
the new approximate posterior is equal to the old approximate posterior with 0of the average mini-
batch likelihood approximation removed and 0of the approximation from the current mini-batch,
d
dqEq(logp(ymj)), added in place of it.
Khan and Lin [2018] take a diﬀerent approach employing damped simpliﬁed ﬁxed-point updates
for local VI M=Nand then using an update schedule that selects a mini-batch at random and then
updates the local natural parameters for these data-points in parallel. That is for all data points in the
mini-batch they apply
(i)
n= (1 )(i 1)
n +d
dqEq(logp(ynj)): (34)
This local update incurs a memory overhead that is Ntimes larger due to the need maintain Nsets of
local parameters rather than just one. However, if the mini-batch partition is ﬁxed across epochs, then
it is suﬃcient to maintain Mnatural parameters instead, corresponding to one for each mini-batch,
(i)
m= (1 )(i 1)
m +d
dqEq(logp(ymj)): (35)
Interestingly, both of these local updates (34 and 35) result in a subtly diﬀerent update to qas the
stochastic global update above (33),
(i)
q=(i 1)
q d
dqEq(logp(ymj)) (i 1)
m
: (36)
Here the deletion step is explicitly revealed again, but now it involves removing the natural
parameters of the mth approximate likelihood (i 1)
mrather than the average mini-batch likelihood
approximation (i 1)
like=L.
A summary of work employing these two types of stochastic approximation is provided in ﬁgure 8.
Each variety of update has its own pros and cons (compare 33 to 36). The stochastic global update
33 does not support general online learning and distributed asynchronous updates, but it is more
memory eﬃcient and faster to converge in the batch setting.
Consider applying both methods to online learning where ylorymcorrespond to the new data seen
at each stage and 0andare user-determined learning rates for the two algorithms. General online
learning poses two challenges for the stochastic global update 33. First, the data are typically not iid
41
local VIM=N
M=1stochastic
schedule
fully local
mini-batchapproximation global*[1] Beal, 2003
[2] Winn et al. 2005
[3] Knowles & Minka 2004
[4] Hoffman et al. 2013  
[5] Hensman et al. 2013
[6] Sheth & Khardon 2016b
[7] Salimans & Knowles 2013
[8] Li et al. (2015)
[9] Khan et al. 2018
*   global + stochastic schedule = global
**  fully local + mini-batch = fully local[4,5,6,7,8][9]
[1][2,3]**Figure 8: Forms of stochastic approximation in the local VI framework and the relationship to previous
work. The granularity of the approximation of the approximation is controlled though M. Mini-batch
approximation may be used inside each local variational free-energy. A stochastic schedule can be
used to randomize the order in which groups of data points are visited. All algorithms have the same
ﬁxed-points (the mini-batch approximation learning rate has to obey the Robbin’s Munro conditions).
(due to covariate or data set shift over time). Second, general online learning does not allow all old data
points to be revisited, demanding incremental updates instead. This means that when a new batch of
data is received we must iterate on just these data to reﬁne the approximate posterior, before moving on
and potentially never returning. Iterating 33 on this new data is possible, but it would have disastrous
consequences as it again breaks the iid mini-batch assumption and would just result in qﬁtting the
new data and forgetting the old previously seen data. A single update could be made, but this will
normally mean that the approach is data-ineﬃcient and slow to learn. Iterating the local updates, on
the other hand, 34 or 35 works nicely as these naturally incorporate a deletion step that removes just
the contribution from the current mini-batch and can, therefore, be iterated to our heart’s content.
Similar arguments can be made about the distributed setting too. Stochastic global updates could
be used in the distributed setting, with each worker querying a server for the current natural parameters
q, computing l=d
dqEq(logp(ylj)) like=Land communicating this to a server. The server’s
role is to update the global parameters (new)
q =(old)
q+ land to send these new parameters to
the workers. The diﬃculty is that this setup must obey the iid assumption so i) the data must be
distributed across the workers in an iid way, and ii) the updates must be returned by each worker with
the same regularity. In contrast, the stochastic local updates can be used in a very similar way without
these restrictions.
The stochastic global update 32 does have two important advantages over the local updates 36.
First, the memory footprint is Ltimes smaller only requiring a single set of natural parameters to be
maintained rather than Mof them. Second, it can be faster to converge when the mini-batches are iid.
Contrast what happens when new data are seen for the ﬁrst time in the two approaches. For simplicity
assume0== 1. In the second approach, (i 1)
m = 0as the data have not been seen before, but
the ﬁrst approach eﬀectively uses (i 1)
m =(i 1)
like=L. That is, the ﬁrst approach eﬀectively estimates
the approximate likelihood for new data, based on those for previously seen data. This is a sensible
approximation for homogeneous mini-batches. A consequence of this is that the learning rate 0can be
much larger than (potentially greater than unity) resulting in faster convergence of the approximate
posterior. It would be interesting to consider modiﬁcations of the local updates (36) that estimate the
mth approximate likelihood based on information from all other data partitions. For example, in the
ﬁrst pass through the data, the approximate likelihoods for unprocessed mini-batches could be updated
to be equal to the last approximate likelihood or to the geometric average of previous approximate
likelihoods. Alternatively, ideas from inference networks could be employed for this purpose.
42
A.7 The relationship between natural gradient, mirror-descent, trust-region and
proximal methods
Each step of gradient ascent of parameters on a costCcan be interpreted as the result of an
optimization problem derived from linearizing the cost function around the old parameter estimate,
C()C((i 1))+rC((i 1))( (i 1))whererC((i 1)) =dC()
dj=(i 1)andaddingasoftconstraint
on the norm of the parameters:
(i)=(i 1)+dC()
d,(i)= argmax
rC((i 1)) 1
2jj (i 1)jj2
2
Here the terms in the linearized cost that do not depend on have been dropped as they do not eﬀect
the solution of the optimization problem. The linearization of the cost ensures that there is an analytic
solution to the optimization and the soft constraint ensures that we do not move too far from the
previous setting of the parameters into a region where the linearization is inaccurate.
This reframing of gradient ascent reveals that it is making an Euclidean assumption about the
geometry parameter space and suggests generalizations of the procedure that are suitable for diﬀerent
geometries. In our case, the parameters are natural parameters of a distribution and measures of
proximity that employ the KL divergence are natural.
The main result of this section is that the following optimization problems:
KL proximal method: (i)
q= argmax
qrF(i)(q(i 1)())q 1
KL
q()kq(i 1)()
(37)
KL trust region: (i)
q= argmax
qrF(i)(q(i 1)())qs.t.KL
q()kq(i 1)()
(38)
KLstrust region: (i)
q= argmax
qrF(i)(q(i 1)())qs.t.KLs
q()kq(i 1)()
(39)
mirror descent: (i)
q= argmax
qrF(i)(q(i 1)())q 1
KL
q(i 1)()kq()
(40)
All yield the same updates as the damped ﬁxed point equations / natural gradient ascent:
(i)
bi= (1 )(i 1)
bi+d
d(i 1)
qEq(i 1)(logp(ybij)) (41)
= (1 )(i 1)
bi+"
d(i 1)
q
d(i 1)
q# 1d
d(i 1)
qEq(i 1)(logp(ybij)): (42)
In the ﬁrst three cases (37 - 39), this equivalence only holds exactly in the general case if the parameter
changes (i)
q=(i)
q (i 1)
qare small.
Here the KL proximal method is the straightforward generalization of the gradient ascent example
that replaces the Euclidean norm by the exclusive KL divergence. The KL trust region method
uses a hard constraint on the same KL instead, but rewriting this as a Lagrangian recovers the KL
proximal method with 1=being the Lagrange multiplier. The KLstrust region method , often used
to justify natural gradient ascent, employs the symmetrized KL divergence instead of the exclusive
KL. The symmetrized KL is the average of the exclusive and inclusive KLs, KLs 
q()kq(i 1)()
=
1
2KL 
q()kq(i 1)()
+1
2KL 
q(i 1)()kq()
.Mirror descent , in its most general form, uses a
Bregman divergence to control the extent to which the parameters change rather than a KL divergence.
However, when applied to exponential families, the Bregman divergence becomes the inclusive KL
divergence yielding the form above [Raskutti and Mukherjee, 2015, Khan et al., 2016, Khan and
Lin, 2018]. Note that this last method operates in the mean parameter space and the equivalence is
43
attained by mapping the mean parameter updates back to the natural parameters. Mirror descent has
the advantage of not relying on the small parameter change assumption to recover natural gradient
ascent. Having explained the rationale behind these approaches we will now sketch how they yield the
ﬁxed-point updates.
The equivalence of the KL proximal method can be shown by diﬀerentiating the cost wrt qand
substituting in the following expressions:
rF(i)(q(i 1)()) =d
dq(i 1)Eq(i 1)(logp(ybij)) dq(i 1)
dq(i 1)(i 1)
bi;
dKL 
q()kq(i 1)()
dq=dq
dq
q (i 1)
q
dq(i 1)
dq(i 1)
q (i 1)
q
:
In the second line above the approximation results from the assumption of small parameter change
(i)
q(or alternatively local constancy of the Fisher information). Equating the derivatives to zero and
rearranging recovers the ﬁxed point equations.
The equivalence of the KL trust region method is now simple to show as the associated Lagrangian,
L(q) =rF(i)(q(i 1)())q 1
 
KL 
q()kq(i 1)()
 
, is theproximal method up to an additive
constant.
TheKLstrust region method can also be rewritten as a Lagrangian L(q) =rF(i)(q(i 1)())q 
1
 
KLs 
q()kq(i 1)()
 
. For small changes in the approximate posterior natural parameters
(i)
q=(i)
q (i 1)
q, the symmetrized KL can be approximated using a second order Taylor expansion,
KLs
q()kq(i 1)()
1
2
q (i 1)
q>dq(i 1)
dq(i 1)
q (i 1)
q
: (43)
This is the same form as the exclusive KL takes, the inclusive and exclusive KL divergences being
locally identical around their optima. Taking derivatives of the Lagrangian and setting them to zero
recovers the ﬁxed point equations again.
Themirror descent method can be shown to yield the ﬁxed points by noting that
rF(i)(q(i 1)()) =d
dq(i 1)Eq(i 1)(logp(ybij)) bi;
dKL 
q(i 1)()kq()
dq=q (i 1)
q:
Diﬀerentiating the mirror descent objective and substituting these results in recovers usual update. The
last result above can be found using convex duality. For a full derivation and more information on the
relationship between mirror descent and natural gradients see Raskutti and Mukherjee [2015].
It is also possible to deﬁne optimization approaches analogous to the above that do not linearize the
free-energy term and instead perform potentially multiple updates of the nested non-linear optimization
problems [Theis and Hoﬀman, 2015, Khan et al., 2015, 2016].
A.8 The equivalence of the simpliﬁed ﬁxed-point updates and Power EP !0:
Proof of property 6
Assume PEP is using unnormalized distributions throughout:
1.p(i)
() =q(i 1)()
p(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()
% form tilted
44
2.q() = proj(p(i)
())% moment match
3.q(i)() = 
q(i 1)()1 1=(q())1=% update posterior
4.t(i)
bi() =q(i)()
q(i 1)()t(i 1)
bi()% update approximate likelihood
From (2,3,4), we have:
logt(i)
bi() =1

log proj(p(i)
()) logq(i 1)()
+ logt(i 1)
bi(): (44)
Using the augmented suﬃcient statistics T()as in A.4 and the fact that q()is unnormalized, we can
write:
logq() = log proj( p(i)
()) =|
qT(): (45)
Letq=R
q()T()dbe the mean parameters of q(). From the moment matching projection,
q=R
p(i)
()T()d. Using Taylor series to expand log proj(p(i)
())as a function of about= 0:
log proj(p(i)
()) = log proj( p(i)
())
=0+d
dlog proj(p(i)
())
=0
+F();(46)
whereF() =P1
t=2t
t!(dt
dtlog proj (p(i)
())
=0)collects all the high order terms in the expansion.
Since log proj(p(i)
())
=0= logq(i 1)(), the above equation becomes:
log proj(p(i)
()) = logq(i 1)() +d
dlog proj(p(i)
())
=0
+F(): (47)
Now considerd
dlog proj(p(i)
()), we have:
d
dlog proj(p(i)
()) =T()|dq
d=T()|dq
dqdq
d(48)
=T()|dq
dqd
dZ
p(i)
()T()d (49)
=T()|dq
dqd
dZ
q(i 1)() 
p(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()!
T()d (50)
=T()|dq
dqZ
q(i 1)() 
p(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()!
logp(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()T()d (51)
=T()|dq
dqd
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() 
p(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()!
logp(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()d;(52)
whereq(i 1)is the natural parameters of q(i 1).
Thus,
d
dlog proj(p(i)
())
=0=T()|dq(i 1)
dq(i 1)d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logp(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()d (53)
=T()|d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logp(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()d: (54)
45
Plug this into (47), we obtain:
log proj(p(i)
()) = logq(i 1)() +T()|d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logp(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()d+F():(55)
From this equation and (44),
logt(i)
bi() =1
 
T()|d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logp(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()d+F()!
+ logt(i 1)
bi()(56)
=T()|d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logp(ybij)
t(i 1)
bi()d+F()
+ logt(i 1)
bi() (57)
=T()|d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logp(ybij)d (58)
 T()|d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logt(i 1)
bi()d+F()
+ logt(i 1)
bi(): (59)
Note that:
T()|d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logt(i 1)
bi()d= logt(i 1)
bi()d
dq(i 1)Z
T()|q(i 1)()d(60)
= logt(i 1)
bi()dq(i 1)
dq(i 1)(61)
= logt(i 1)
bi(): (62)
Hence, (59) becomes:
T()|(i)
bi=T()|d
dq(i 1)Z
q(i 1)() logp(ybij)d+F()
; (63)
which is equivalent to:
T()|(i)
bi=T()|d
dqZ
q() logp(ybij)d+F()
: (64)
Letq()be the normalized distribution of q(), i.e.q() =Zqq(). The ﬁxed point update for local VI
is:
(i)
bi=d
dqZ
q() logp(ybij)d; (65)
whereq=R
T()|q()d=q=Zq. We have:
d
dqZ
q() logp(ybij)d=dq
dqd
dqZ1
Zqq() logp(ybij)d (66)
= (  ZqI)1
  Zqd
dqZ
q() logp(ybij)d (67)
=d
dqZ
q() logp(ybij)d: (68)
From this equation and the fact thatF()
!0when!0, the ﬁxed point update for local VI satisﬁes
the Power-EP update in (64) when !0.
46
B Gradients of the free-energy with respect to hyperparameters
In this section, we derive the gradients of the global free energy wrt the hyperparameters when the
local VI procedure has converged to the optimal approximate posterior (either through analytic, oﬀ-the-
shelf or ﬁxed-point optimization). We provide two derivations: First, the standard one which is speciﬁc
to approximate posteriors that are in the exponential family. Second, a derivation that applies for
generalq()which also provides more insight.
B.1 The standard derivation
As shown in the previous sections, the global free energy is as follows,
F(q()) =Z
dq(;q) logp()Q
mp(ymj)
q(;q)
=Z
dq(;q)[logp() logq(;q)]
| {z }
F1+X
mZ
dq(;q) logp(ymj)
|{z }
F2:
Note that,
q(;q) = exp(|
qT() A(q));
p(;0) = exp(|
0T() A(0));
q=0+X
mm:
Hence,
F1=A(q) A(0) X
m|
nEq()[T()] =A(0) A(q) X
m|
ndA(q)
dq:
DiﬀerentiatingF1andF2wrt a hyperparameter of the model, noting that the natural gradients of
the local factors and the global variational approximation both depend on , gives,
dF1
d=dA(q)
dq|dq
d dA(0)
d0|d0
d X
mdA(q)
dq|dm
d |
md2A(q)
dqdqdq
d
dF2
d=X
m@F2m
@+@F2m
@q|dq
d
Note thatq=0+P
mm, leading to
 X
mdm
d= dq
d+d0
d; (69)
Here,
@F2m
@q=@
@qEq(logp(ybij)): (70)
and that at convergence 31,
@F2m
@q=dq
dqq=d2A(q)
dqdqm: (71)
47
Therefore,
dFVFE
d=dA(q)
dq dA(0)
d0|d0
d+X
m@F2m
@(72)
= (q 0)|d0
d+X
m@F2m
@; (73)
whereq=dA(q)
dq=Eq()[T()]are themeanparameters.
B.2 A more general derivation
Considerthegeneralcasewheretheapproximateposteriorcomprisesaproductoftermsthatapproximate
the likelihoods and one that approximates the prior,
q(; ) =NY
n=0tn(; ): (74)
Here are the variational parameters (these may correspond to natural parameters. Again the scale
of the approximate terms tn(; )will be set such that q(; )is normalized. Note this is a more
general form of approximate posterior that allows the prior to be approximated if it lies outside of the
variational family Q. If the prior lies within the variational family, the local updates will automatically
set it equal to the prior recovering the treatment in the rest of the paper and meaning that the results
presented here will still hold.
The global free-energy depends on the model hyperparameters through the joint distribution
p(y;j),
F(;q(; )) =Z
dq(; ) logp(y;j)
q(; )(75)
Now consider the optimal variational approximation for a ﬁxed setting of the hyperparameters,
 opt() = argmax
 Z
dq(; ) logp(y;j)
q(; ): (76)
The collapsed variational bound can therefore be denoted, F(;q(; opt()))and it is this that we will
optimize to ﬁnd the hyperparameters. Before we do so, note that we have been careful to represent
the two distinct ways that the free-energy depends on the hyperparameters, i) through the log-joint’s
dependence, ii) through the optimal approximate posterior’s implicit dependence via  opt()). In fact we
can decouple these two contributions and consider evaluating the free-energy when the hyperparameters
diﬀer,F(;q(; opt(0))), the collapsed bound being recovered when 0=.
We are now in a position to compute derivatives of the collapsed free-energy using the insight above
to split this into two terms,
d
dF(;q(; opt())) =d
dF(;q(; opt(0)))
0=+d
d0F(;q(; opt(0)))
0=: (77)
48
We now consider these two terms: First, the dependence through the log-joint distribution,
d
dF(;q(; opt(0)))
0==d
dZ
dq(; (0)) logp(y;j)
0=
=MX
m=1d
dZ
dq(; (0)) logp(ymj;)
0=+Z
dq(; (0))d
dlogp(j)
0=
=MX
m=1Eq()d
dlogp(ymj;)
+Eq()d
dlogp(j)
: (78)
Second, the dependence through the optimal approximate posterior’s implicit dependence on 
d
d0F(;q(; opt(0)))
0==d opt(0)
d0d
d F(;q(; )
0=; = opt(0)= 0: (79)
Here we have substituted in the fact that were are at the collapsed bound and so the derivative wrt  
is zero.
So the term that arises from the dependence of the approximate posterior on the hyperparameters
(terms 2) vanishes meaning the only contribution comes from the ﬁrst term. This is precisely the
same term that would remain if we were to perform coordinate ascent (since then when updating the
hyperparameters the approximate posterior would have been ﬁxed).
d
dF(;q(; opt())) =MX
m=1Eq(; opt())d
dlogp(ymj;)
+Eq(; opt())d
dlogp(j)
:(80)
When the prior distribution is in the exponential family, the second term above becomes
Eq(; opt())d
dlogp(j)
= (q 0)|d0
d: (81)
This recovers the expression in the previous section, although we have not assumed the approximate
posterior is in the exponential family (here qand0are the average of the prior’s suﬃcient statistics
under the approximate posterior and the prior respectively).
Figure 9 provides some intuition for these results. Note that in the case where the approximating
family includes the true posterior distribution, the collapsed bound is equal to the log-likelihood of the
hyperparameters. So, the result shows that the gradient of the log-likelihood wrt the hyperparameters
is equal to the gradient of the free-energy wrt the hyperparameters, treating qas ﬁxed. Often this
is computed in the M-step of variational EM, but it is used in coordinate ascent, which can be slow
to converge. Instead, this gradient can be passed to an optimizer to perform direct gradient-based
optimization of the log-likelihood.
C Streaming Gaussian process regression and classiﬁcation
C.1 Online variational free-energy approach using shared pseudo-points with ap-
proximate maximum likelihood learning for the hyperparameters
We consider a variational inference scheme with an approximation posterior based on pseudo-points
and that all streaming batches or groups of data points touch the same set of pseudo-points, that is,
p(fjy)/p(f)RY
r=1p(yrjf)p(f)RY
r=1tr(u)/p(f6=uju)q(u) =q(f); (82)
49
= 0
= Figure 9: Contours of the free-energy F(;q(; ))are shown in green as a function of the hyper-
parameters and the variational parameters of the approximate posterior . The collapsed bound
F(;q(; opt()))is shown in blue. The gradients of the free-energy with respect to the variational
parameters are zero along the collapsed boundd
d F(;q(; ))j = opt= 0, by deﬁnition. This means
that the gradients of the collapsed free-energy as a function of the hyperparameters are equal to those
of the free-energy itself,d
dF(;q(; )) =d
dF(;q(; opt())).
whereRis the number of batches considered and tr(u)is the approximate contribution of the r-th
batch to the posterior. This is the standard set up considered for sparse GPs in the literature, see
e.g. Hensman et al. [2013], Bui et al. [2017b]. We next detail the speciﬁcs for the streaming settings
[Bui et al., 2017a], when we allow the pseudo-points to move and adjust the hyperparameters as new
data arrive.
Leta=f(zold)andb=f(znew)be the pseudo-outputs or inducing points before and after seeing
new data, where zoldandzneware the pseudo-inputs accordingly. Note that extra pseudo-points can be
added or conversely, old pseudo-points can be removed, i.e. the cardinalities of aandbdo not need to
be the same. The previous posterior, qold(f) =p(f6=aja;old)q(a), can be used to ﬁnd the approximate
likelihood given by old observations as follows,
p(yoldjf)qold(f)p(yoldjold)
p(fjold)asqold(f)p(fjold)p(yoldjf)
p(yoldjold): (83)
Note that we have made the dependence of the hyperparameters explicit, as these will be optimized,
together with the variational parameters, using the variational free-energy. Substituting the approximate
likelihood above into the posterior that we want to target gives us:
p(fjyold;ynew) =p(fjnew)p(yoldjf)p(ynewjf)
p(ynew;yoldjnew)p(fjnew)qold(f)p(yoldjold)p(ynewjf)
p(fjold)p(ynew;yoldjnew):(84)
The new posterior approximation takes the same form as with the previous posterior, but with
the new pseudo-points and new hyperparameters: qnew(f) =p(f6=bjb;new)q(b). This approximate
50
posterior can be obtained by minimizing the KL divergence,
KL[qnew(f)jj^p(fjyold;new)] =Z
dfqnew(f) logp(f6=bjb;new)qnew(b)
p(yoldjold)
p(ynew;yoldjnew)p(fjnew)p(ynewjf)qold(f)
p(fjold)(85)
= logZ2(new)
Z1(old)+Z
dfqnew(f)
logp(ajold)qnew(b)
p(bjnew)qold(a)p(ynewjf)
:(86)
The last equation above is obtained by noting that p(fjnew)=p(f6=bjb;new) =p(bjnew)and
qold(f)
p(fjold)=hhhhhhhp(f6=aja;old)qold(a)
hhhhhhhp(f6=aja;old)p(ajold)=qold(a)
p(ajold):
Since the KL divergence is non-negative, the second term in (86)is the negative lower bound of
the approximate online log marginal likelihood5, or the variational free energy, F(qnew(f)). We can
decompose the bound as follows,
F(qnew(f);new) =Z
dfqnew(f)
logp(ajold)qnew(b)
p(bjnew)qold(a)p(ynewjf)
= KL(q(b)jjp(bjnew)) Z
dfqnew(f) logp(ynewjf)
 Z
daqnew(a) logqold(a)
p(ajold):
The ﬁrst two terms form the variational free-energy as if the current batch is the whole training data, and
the last term constrains the posterior to take into account the old likelihood (through the approximate
posterior and the prior).
C.2 Online variational free-energy approach using private pseudo-points with ap-
proximate maximum likelihood learning for the hyperparameters
Instead of using a common set of pseudo-points for all data points or streaming batches, we can assign
separate pseudo-points to each batch of data points as follows,
p(fjy)/p(f)RY
r=1p(yrjf)p(f)RY
r=1tr(ur)/p(f6=uju)q(u) =q(f); (87)
where urare the pseudo-points private to the r-th batch. As new data arrives, new pseudo-points
will be added to summarize the new data, and the old pseudo-points, corresponding to the previously
seen batches, will remain unchanged. This means we only need to add and adjust new pseudo-points
and the new likelihood approximation for the new data points, as opposed to all pseudo-points and all
corresponding likelihood approximations as done in the previous section.
Similar to the online learning the previous section, we will try to approximate the running posterior
in eq. (84),
p(fjyold;ynew)p(fjnew)qold(f)p(ynewjf)
p(fjold)p(yoldjold)
p(ynew;yoldjnew); (88)
where
p(fjold) =p(f6=aja;old)p(ajold);
qold(f) =p(f6=aja;old)q(a);
5Note that this is only an approximation, as the hyperparameters are adjusted as new data arrive.
51
andarepresents all pseudo-points used for previous batches. Let bbe the new pseudo-points for the
new data and tb(b)be the contribution of the new data points ynewtowards the posterior. The new
approximate posterior is assumed to take the following form,
qnew(f)/p(f6=aja;new)q(a)tb(b)
=p(f6=a;bja;b;new)q(a)p(bja;new)tb(b);
=p(f6=a;bja;b;new)q(a)q(bja); (89)
where we have chosen q(bja)/p(bja;new)tb(b)and made the dependence on the hyperparameters
newimplicit. Note that q(a)is the variational distribution over the previous pseudo-points, and such,
we only need to parameterize and learn the conditional distribution q(bja).
Similar to the previous section, writing down the KL divergence from the running posterior in
eq. (88) to the approximate posterior in eq. (89), and ignoring constant terms result in the online
variational free-energy as follows,
F(qnew(f);new) =Z
dfqnew(f) logp(fjnew)qold(f)p(ynewjf)
p(fjold)qnew(f): (90)
Note that,
qold(f)
p(fjold)=hhhhhhhp(f6=aja;old)q(a)
hhhhhhhp(f6=aja;old)p(ajold)=q(a)
p(ajold); (91)
p(fjnew)
qnew(f)=hhhhhhhhhhhhp(f6=aja;old)p(a;bjnew)
hhhhhhhp(f6=aja;old)q(a;b)=p(a;bjnew)
q(a;b): (92)
This leads to,
F(qnew(f);new) = KL[q(a;b)jjp(a;bjnew)] +Z
dfqnew(f) logp(ynewjf)
 H[q(a))] +Z
daq(a) logp(aj): (93)
Note again that we are only optimizing the variational parameters of q(bja)and the hyperparameters,
and keeping q(a)ﬁxed.
C.3 Online variational free-energy approach for both hyperparameters and the
latent function with shared pseudo-points
The variational approaches above, while maintaining an online distributional approximation for the
latent function, only retain a point estimate of the hyperparameters. Imagine having observed the ﬁrst
batch of data points in a regression task and trained the model on this batch, and that the second
batch contains only one data point. In this case, maximum likelihood learning of the hyperparameters
will tend to give very large observation noise, i.e. the noise is used to solely explain the new data and
the latent function is largely ignored. Using the new model with the newly obtained hyperparameters
will thus result in poor predictions on previously seen data points.
We attempt to address this issue by maintaining a distributional approximation for the hyperparame-
ters, as well as one for the latent function, and adjusting these approximations using variational inference
as new data arrive. In particular, extending appendix C.1 by introducing a variational approximation
over the hyperparameters gives,
old approx. posterior: qold(f;) =p(f6=aja;)q(a)qold();
new approx. posterior: qnew(f;) =p(f6=bjb;)q(b)qnew():
52
The likelihood of previously seen data points can be approximated via the approximate posterior as
follows,
p(yoldjf;)qold(f;)p(yold)
p(fj)p():
Similar to the previous section, the online variational free-energy can be obtained by applying Jensen’s
inequality to the online log marginal likelihood, or by writing down the KL divergence as follows,
KL[qnew(f;)jjp(f;jyall)] =Z
dfdqnew(f;) logp(f6=bjb;)qnew(b)qnew()p(ynew;yold)
p(fj)p()p(ynewjf;)p(yoldjf;)
= logp(ynewjyold) +F(qnew(f;))
where the online variational free-energy is,
F(qnew(f;)) =Z
dfdqnew(f;) logp(f6=bjb;)q(b)qnew()
p(f6=aja;)q(a)qold()p(ynewjf;)
=Z
dfdqnew(f;) logp(a;)q(b)qnew()
p(b;)q(a)qold()p(ynewjf;)
= KL[qnew()jjqold()] +Z
dq() (KL[q(b)jjp(bj)])
+Z
dq()qnew(aj) logp(aj)
q(a) Z
dfdqnew(f;) logp(ynewjf;):
Most terms in the variational free-energy above requires computing an expectation wrt the variational
approximation q(), which is not available in closed-form even when q()takes a simple form such as a
diagonal Gaussian. However, these expectations can be approximated by simple Monte Carlo with the
reparameterization trick [Kingma and Welling, 2014, Rezende et al., 2014]. As in previous section, all
other expectations can be handled tractably, either in closed-form or by using Gaussian quadrature.
C.4 Online variational free-energy approach for both hyperparameters and the
latent function with private pseudo-points
As in appendix C.2, new pseudo-points can be allocated to new data as they arrive, and the current
pseudo-points and their marginal variational approximation will remaine ﬁxed. The corresponding
variational approximation for both the latent function and hyperparameters are:
old approx. posterior: qold(f;) =p(f6=aja;)q(a)qold();
new approx. posterior: qnew(f;) =p(f6=a;bja;b;)q(a)q(bja)qnew():
The new approximate posterior above can be derived by approximating the likelihood factor of the
new data in the running posterior as follows,
^p(f;jy)/qold(f;)p(ynewjf;)
=p(f6=aja;)q(a)qold()p(ynewjf;)
=p(f6=a;bja;)q(a)qold()p(bja;b;)p(ynewjf;)
p(f6=a;bja;b;)q(a)qold()t1(bja)t2()t3(b)t4();
whereftig4
i=1are the approximate factors representing the contribution of the conditional prior
and the likelihood to the running posterior. In other words, q(bja)/t1(bja)t3(b)andqnew()/
53
qold()t2()t4(). Substituting the above variational approximation to the online variational free-energy
gives us,
F(qnew(f;)) =Z
dfdqnew(f;) logp(f6=a;bja;b;)q(a)q(bja)qnew()
p(f6=aja;)q(a)qold()p(ynewjf;)
= KL[qnew()jjqold()] +Z
dq() (KL[q(a;b)jjp(a;bj)])
 Z
dq() (KL[q(a)jjp(aj)]) Z
dfdqnew(f;) logp(ynewjf;):(94)
Similar to the previous section, all terms the free-energy above can be tractably handled in closed-form
or by using simple Monte Carlo with the reparameterization trick [Kingma and Welling, 2014, Rezende
et al., 2014].
D Extra results for streaming Gaussian process regression and classi-
ﬁcation experiments
D.1 Binary classiﬁcation on a toy 2D data set
In this section, we include several extra results on the toy 2D experiment presented in the main text.
We use a Gaussian process prior with a zero mean function and an ARD exponentiated quadratic
covariance function and thus there are three kernel hyperparameters to be tuned including the kernel
variance and two lengthscale parameters. Several inference methods were considered: (i) MCMC for
both the latent function and the hyperparameters, without any sparsiﬁcation, (ii) variational inference
for the latent function and approximate maximum likelihood learning for the hyperparameters, and (iii)
variational inference for both the latent function and the hyperparameters. We ﬁrst consider the batch,
static setting, i.e. inference using the whole data set, and then the streaming setting with three equal
batches for the variational methods. Figure 10 shows the predictions and the hyperparameter estimates
for all methods once all training points are observed. The predictions seem qualitatively similar, though,
for the approximate methods, only point estimates or overconﬁdent distributional estimates of the
hyperparameters are obtained. The predictions made by the variational methods after sequentially
observing the data batches, together with the hyperparameter estimates, are shown in ﬁg. 11. We also
include a failure case when uncertainty over the hyperparameters are not retained and propagated, in
ﬁg. 12. In this case, only ten data points were included in the second batch. One of the lengthscale
hyperparameters was severely under-estimated when approximate maximum likelihood learning was
used.
E Full results of the federated learning experiments
In this section, we include the full results of the federated learning experiment to train Bayesian neural
networks on federated, decentralized data. As a reminder, Bayesian neural networks are an important
model in modern machine learning toolkit, fusing the capacity of neural networks with the ﬂexibility of
Bayesian inference. The goal of Bayesian learning for neural networks is to obtain the posterior of the
network parameters given the training points and to use this for prediction as follows,
posterior: p(jx;y) =p()QN
n=1p(ynj;xn)
p(yjx)=p()QK
k=1QNk
n=1p(yn;kj;xn;k)
p(yjx);
prediction: p(yjy;x;x) =Z
p(jx;y)p(yj;x)d;
54
Figure 10: Results of the streaming GP experiment on a toy classiﬁcation data set: the performance of
several batch and streaming methods after seeing all training points. In the batch case, we consider
three inference methods: MCMC for both the latent variable and the hyperparameters, VI for both the
latent function and the hyperparameters, and VI for the latent function and approximate maximum
likelihood learning for the hyperparameters. The two latter methods are also tested in the streaming
settings. We show the predictions made by the methods after training in the batch case, and after
seeing all three batches in the streaming case. The (distributional) hyperparameter estimates are also
included. Best viewed in colour.
wherefxn;yngN
n=1are the training points, is the network weights and biases. However, getting the
exact posterior is analytically intractable and as such approximation methods are needed. In this
section, we discuss several approximation strategies for training a Bayesian neural network on the
standard MNIST ten-way classiﬁcation data set. In particular, we focus on a case where data are
decentralized on diﬀerent machines, that is we further assume that Ntraining points are partitioned
intoK= 10disjoint memory shards. Furthermore, two levels of data homogeneity across memory
shards are considered: homogeneous [or iid, that is each shard has training points of all classes] and
55
Figure 11: Results of the streaming GP experiment on a toy classiﬁcation data set: the performance of
the streaming methods after seeing each data batch. Two methods were considered: VI for both the
latent function and the hyperparameters, and VI for the latent function and approximate maximum
likelihood learning for the hyperparameters. We show the predictions made by the methods after seeing
each data batch and the corresponding (distributional) hyperparameter estimates. Best viewed in
colour.
inhomogeneous [or non-iid, i.e. each shard has training points of only one class].
We place a diagonal standard Normal prior over the parameters, p() =N(; 0;I), and initialize
the mean of the variational approximations as suggested by Glorot and Bengio [2010]. For distributed
training methods, the data set is partitioned into 10 subsets or shards, and 10 compute nodes (workers)
with each able to access one memory shard. The implementation of diﬀerent inference strategies was
done in Tensorﬂow [Abadi et al., 2016]) and the workload between workers is managed using Ray
[Moritz et al., 2017].
56
Figure 12: Results of the streaming GP experiment on a toy classiﬁcation data set: a failure case of
maximum likelihood learning for the hyperparameters. Two methods were considered: VI for both the
latent function and the hyperparameters, and VI for the latent function and approximate maximum
likelihood learning for the hyperparameters. We show the predictions made by the methods after seeing
each data batch and the corresponding (distributional) hyperparameter estimates. Best viewed in
colour.
E.1 Global VI
We ﬁrst considered global variational inference, as described in section 5, for getting an approximate
posterior over the parameters. The variational lower bound (eq. (18)) is optimized using Adam [Kingma
and Ba, 2014]. We considered one compute node (with either one core or ten cores) that can access
the entire data set, and simulates the data distribution by sequentially showing mini-batches that can
potentially have all ten classes (iid) or that have data of only one class (non-iid). The full performance
on the test set during training for diﬀerent learning rate hyperparameters of the Adam optimizer
are shown in ﬁgs. 13 and 14. Notice that in the iid setting, larger learning rates tend to yield faster
convergence but can give a slightly poorer predictive performance on the test set at the end of training
(see ﬁg. 14 with a learning rate of 0.005). The non-iid is arguably more diﬃcult and the performance
57
can oscillate if the learning rate is too large.
E.2 Bayesian committee machine
We next considered an embarrassingly parallel scheme based on the Bayesian committee machine
Tresp [2000]. In particular, two prior sharing strategies as described in section 7.1, BCM - same prior
and BCM - split prior, were considered. Each worker has access to one memory shard and performs
global variational inference independently. While the workers were running, we occasionally polled the
approximate posteriors from all workers, merged them using BCM and computed the test performance
using the merged posterior. We report the test performance during training for diﬀerent prior sharing
schemes in both iid and non-iid settings in ﬁgs. 15 and 16, respectively. Note that, we also varied
the learning rate of Adam for each worker. Both prior sharing strategies in combination with BCM
performs surprisingly well in the iid setting. However, they fell short in the non-iid setting as the
Gaussian sub-posteriors can potentially have diﬀerent supports and, if this the case, multiplying them
will not give a good global approximation.
E.3 Sequential, one-pass PVI
We next considered a sequential training scheme using PVI. Each worker, in turn, performs global
variational inference with the prior being the posterior of the last trained worker. Learning using this
schedule is identical to the Variational Continual Learning approach of Nguyen et al. [2018]. We varied
the learning rates of Adam (used to optimize the variational lower bound for each worker) and the
number of epochs of data used for each worker. The test performance was recorded after each worker
ﬁnished its training, and the full results for the iid and non-iid settings are shown in ﬁgs. 17 and 18,
respectively. This schedule performs well in the iid setting, but struggles when the data across workers
are non-iid.
E.4 PVI with synchronous updates
We considered PVI with synchronous updates, i.e. the central parameter waits for all workers to ﬁnish
before gathering the approximate likelihoods together and then sending out the new approximate
posterior. As typically done in (parallel) Power-EP, we also considered damped updates, i.e. the new
approximate likelihood is a linear combination of the old approximate likelihood and the factor provided
by a worker. We explored diﬀerent damping factors (higher means slower updates), and diﬀerent
learning rates for the optimization at the local worker. The full results on the test set during training
are shown in ﬁgs. 19 and 20 for the iid and non-iid settings, respectively.
E.5 PVI with asynchronous updates
Finally, we allowed the parameter server to update the approximate posterior as soon as a worker has
ﬁnished its computation. This schedule can potentially cause stale updates. However, this is more
suitable to cases when the communication between the workers and the parameter server is unreliable,
or when the distribution of data across workers is skewed, i.e. one worker might have a lot more data
points than others and consequently might require a longer time to ﬁnish a computation round. As in
the synchronous case, we varied the damping factor and learning rate. The full results are shown in
ﬁgs. 22 and 23 for the iid and non-iid settings, respectively.
58
210100error /%
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
100101102103104
train time /s10−1100nll /nat
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
(a) one compute node with one core and iid mini-batches
210100error /%
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
100101102103104
train time /s100101nll /nat
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050 (b) one compute node with one core and non-iid mini-batches
Figure 13: The performance of global VI on the test set in the iid [left] and non-iid [right] settings, when the compute node has only one core.
Diﬀerent traces correspond to diﬀerent learning rate hyperparameters of Adam.
59
(a) one compute node with ten cores and iid mini-batches
(b) one compute node with ten cores and non-iid mini-batches
Figure 14: The performance of global VI on the test set in the iid and non-iid settings, when the compute node has ten cores. Diﬀerent traces
correspond to diﬀerent learning rate hyperparameters of Adam.
60
210100error /%
lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
lrate=0.0100
100101102103104
train time /s100nll /nat
lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
lrate=0.0100
(a) BCM with the same N(0;1)prior across 10 workers and iid data
210100error /%
lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
lrate=0.0100
100101102103104
train time /s100nll /nat
lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
lrate=0.0100(b) BCM with the prior N(0;1)being split equally across 10 workers and iid
data
Figure 15: Performance of BCM with two prior sharing strategies on the iid setting, for various learning rates. Best viewed in colour.
61
210100error /%
lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
lrate=0.0100
100101102103104
train time /s2×1003×1004×100nll /nat
lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
lrate=0.0100
(a) BCM with the same N(0;1)prior across workers and non-iid data
210100error /%
lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
lrate=0.0100
100101102103104
train time /snll /nat
lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
lrate=0.0100 (b) BCM with the prior N(0;1)being split equally across workers and non-iid
data
Figure 16: Performance of BCM with two prior sharing strategies on the non-iid setting, for various learning rates. Best viewed in colour.
62
210100error /%lrate=0.001
no epochs = 1
no epochs = 10
no epochs = 20no epochs = 50
no epochs = 100
210100error /%lrate=0.005
100101102103104
train time /s210100error /%lrate=0.010
(a) Error
10−1100nll /natlrate=0.001
no epochs = 1
no epochs = 10
no epochs = 20no epochs = 50
no epochs = 100
10−1100nll /natlrate=0.005
100101102103104
train time /s10−1100nll /natlrate=0.010 (b) NLL
Figure 17: Performance of sequential PVI with only one pass through all memory shards when the data are iid. The number of epochs for
each worker and the learning rate hyperparameter of Adam were varied. Best viewed in colour.
63
210100error /%lrate=0.001
no epochs = 1
no epochs = 10
no epochs = 20no epochs = 50
no epochs = 100
210100error /%lrate=0.005
100101102103104
train time /s210100error /%lrate=0.010
(a) Error
3×1004×100nll /natlrate=0.001
no epochs = 1
no epochs = 10
no epochs = 20no epochs = 50
no epochs = 100
101
3×1004×1006×100nll /natlrate=0.005
100101102103104
train time /s101
3×1004×1006×100nll /natlrate=0.010(b) NLL
Figure 18: Performance of sequential PVI with only one pass through all memory shards when the data are non-iid. The number of epochs for
each worker and the learning rate hyperparameter of Adam were varied. Best viewed in colour.
64
210100error /%damping=0.950
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
210100error /%damping=0.900
100101102103
train time /s210100error /%damping=0.800
(a) Error
10−1100nll /natdamping=0.950
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
10−1100nll /natdamping=0.900
100101102103
train time /s10−1100nll /natdamping=0.800 (b) NLL
Figure 19: Performance of PVI with synchronous updates when the data are iid. In this experiment, each worker communicates with the
central server after one epoch. The learning rate hyperparameter of Adam and the damping factor were varied. Best viewed in colour.
65
210100error /%damping=0.950
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
210100error /%damping=0.900
100101102103
train time /s210100error /%damping=0.800
(a) Error
100
3×10−14×10−16×10−12×100nll /natdamping=0.950
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
100nll /natdamping=0.900
100101102103
train time /s100101nll /natdamping=0.800(b) NLL
Figure 20: Performance of PVI with synchronous updates when the data are non-iid. In this experiment, each worker communicates with the
central server after one epoch. The learning rate hyperparameter of Adam and the damping factor were varied. Best viewed in colour.
66
10−210−1100101102error /%
test
train
100101102103104
train time /s10−210−1100nll /natFigure 21: For certain hyperparameter settings, PVI with synchronous updates worryingly exhibits
over-ﬁtting.
67
210100error /%damping=0.950
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
210100error /%damping=0.900
100101102103
train time /s210100error /%damping=0.800
(a) Error
100nll /natdamping=0.950
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
100nll /natdamping=0.900
100101102103
train time /s100101nll /natdamping=0.800 (b) NLL
Figure 22: Performance of PVI with asynchronous, lock-free updates when the data are iid. In this experiment, each worker communicates
with the central server after one epoch. The learning rate hyperparameter of Adam and the damping factor were varied. Best viewed in colour.
68
210100error /%damping=0.950
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
210100error /%damping=0.900
100101102103
train time /s210100error /%damping=0.800
(a) Error
100
6×10−12×100nll /natdamping=0.950
lrate=0.0001
lrate=0.0005lrate=0.0010
lrate=0.0050
100
6×10−12×100nll /natdamping=0.900
100101102103
train time /s100
6×10−12×1003×1004×100nll /natdamping=0.800(b) NLL
Figure 23: Performance of PVI with asynchronous, lock-free updates when the data are non-iid. In this experiment, each worker communicates
with the central server after one epoch. The learning rate hyperparameter of Adam and the damping factor were varied. Best viewed in colour.
69
E.6 Stochastic Natural Gradient Variational Inference for Bayesian Neural Net-
works
In this experiment, we stress-test various optimization methods for global variational inference for
Bayesian neural networks. In particular, we consider two methods: (i) stochastic natural-gradient global
VI with a ﬁxed learning rate (SNGD, see eq. (13)), and (ii) stochastic ﬂatgradient global VI with an
adaptive learning rate provided by Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014]. Two Bayesian neural networks with
one hidden layer of 200 or 500 Relu hidden units, and the standard MNIST ten-class classiﬁcation
problem are employed for this experiment. The network is trained using mini-batches of 200 data
points and 800 or 1000 epochs. Both optimization methods considered have similar running time. The
full results are included in ﬁgs. 24, 25, 27 and 28 and key results are shown in ﬁgs. 26 and 29. It
can be noticed from ﬁgs. 26 and 29 that the best versions of SNDG and Adam perform similarly in
terms of both classiﬁcation errors and convergence speed/data eﬃciency. However, both methods do
require tuning of the learning rate hyperparameter. As already observed in the global VI experiment in
section 7.1, signs of fast convergence early during training when using Adam do not necessarily result
in a good predictive performance at the end.
As mentioned in the main text, while natural gradients has been shown to be eﬀective in the batch,
global VI settings [Honkela et al., 2010], the result presented here could be seen as a negative result
for natural-gradient based methods — a stochastic natural-gradient/ﬁxed-point method with ﬁxed
learning rate does not outperform an adaptive stochastic ﬂat-gradient method. However, it might not
be surprising as Adam adjusts its step-sizes based on approximate second-order information of the
objective. This also suggests a future research venue to develop eﬀective adaptive optimization schemes
for stochastic natural-gradient variational inference.
70
100101102103
epoch101102error /%train, adam, lr=0.001
test, adam, lr=0.001
train, adam, lr=0.005
test, adam, lr=0.005
train, adam, lr=0.01
test, adam, lr=0.01
train, adam, lr=0.02
test, adam, lr=0.02
train, adam, lr=0.03
test, adam, lr=0.03train, sngd, lr=0.0001
test, sngd, lr=0.0001
train, sngd, lr=0.00015
test, sngd, lr=0.00015
train, sngd, lr=0.0002
test, sngd, lr=0.0002
train, sngd, lr=0.00025
test, sngd, lr=0.00025
train, sngd, lr=0.0003
test, sngd, lr=0.0003Figure 24: Classiﬁcation error rates on the train and test sets during training using Adam and Stochastic
Natural Gradient (SNGD) methods on the MNIST classiﬁcation task with a Bayesian neural network
with one hidden layer of 200 rectiﬁed linear units. The ﬁnal performance of all settings are shown in
ﬁg. 26. For both Adam and SNGD, the performance highly depends on the learning rate, but the best
learning rates for both methods give similar train and test results and yield similar convergence. Note
that while Adam adaptively changes the learning rate based on the gradient statistics, SNGD employs
a ﬁxed step size. See text for more details. Best viewed in colour.
71
100101102103
epoch10−1100nll /nattrain, adam, lr=0.001
test, adam, lr=0.001
train, adam, lr=0.005
test, adam, lr=0.005
train, adam, lr=0.01
test, adam, lr=0.01
train, adam, lr=0.02
test, adam, lr=0.02
train, adam, lr=0.03
test, adam, lr=0.03train, sngd, lr=0.0001
test, sngd, lr=0.0001
train, sngd, lr=0.00015
test, sngd, lr=0.00015
train, sngd, lr=0.0002
test, sngd, lr=0.0002
train, sngd, lr=0.00025
test, sngd, lr=0.00025
train, sngd, lr=0.0003
test, sngd, lr=0.0003Figure 25: Negative log-likelihoods on the train and test sets during training using Adam and Stochastic
Natural Gradient (SNGD) methods on the MNIST classiﬁcation task with a Bayesian neural network
with one hidden layer of 200 rectiﬁed linear units. The ﬁnal performance of all settings are shown in
ﬁg. 26. For both Adam and SNGD, the performance highly depends on the learning rate, but the best
learning rates for both methods give similar train and test results and yield similar convergence. Note
that while Adam adaptively changes the learning rate based on the gradient statistics, SNGD employs
a ﬁxed step size. See text for more details. Best viewed in colour.
72
Figure 26: Performance on the train set [left] and test set [right] after 1000 epochs using Adam and Stochastic Natural Gradient (SNGD)
methods on the MNIST classiﬁcation task with a Bayesian neural network with one hidden layer of 200 rectiﬁed linear units, and the typical
performance traces as training progress [inset plots]. This ﬁgure summarizes the full results in ﬁgs. 24 and 25. The performance is measured
using the classiﬁcation error [error] and the negative log-likelihood [nll], and for both measures, lower is better and, as such, closer to the
bottom left is better. For both Adam and SNGD, the performance highly depends on the learning rate, but the best learning rates for both
methods give similar train and test results and yield similar convergence. Note that while Adam adaptively changes the learning rate based
on the gradient statistics, SNGD employs a ﬁxed step size. See text for more details. Best viewed in colour.
73
100101102103
epoch100101102error /%train, adam, lr=0.001
test, adam, lr=0.001
train, adam, lr=0.005
test, adam, lr=0.005
train, adam, lr=0.01
test, adam, lr=0.01
train, adam, lr=0.02
test, adam, lr=0.02
train, adam, lr=0.03
test, adam, lr=0.03train, sngd, lr=0.0001
test, sngd, lr=0.0001
train, sngd, lr=0.00015
test, sngd, lr=0.00015
train, sngd, lr=0.0002
test, sngd, lr=0.0002
train, sngd, lr=0.00025
test, sngd, lr=0.00025
train, sngd, lr=0.0003
test, sngd, lr=0.0003Figure 27: Classiﬁcation error rates on the train and test sets during training using Adam and Stochastic
Natural Gradient (SNGD) methods on the MNIST classiﬁcation task with a Bayesian neural network
with one hidden layer of 500 rectiﬁed linear units. The ﬁnal performance of all settings are shown in
ﬁg. 29. For both Adam and SNGD, the performance highly depends on the learning rate, but the best
learning rates for both methods give similar train and test results and yield similar convergence. Note
that while Adam adaptively changes the learning rate based on the gradient statistics, SNGD employs
a ﬁxed step size. See text for more details. Best viewed in colour.
74
100101102103
epoch10−1100nll /nattrain, adam, lr=0.001
test, adam, lr=0.001
train, adam, lr=0.005
test, adam, lr=0.005
train, adam, lr=0.01
test, adam, lr=0.01
train, adam, lr=0.02
test, adam, lr=0.02
train, adam, lr=0.03
test, adam, lr=0.03train, sngd, lr=0.0001
test, sngd, lr=0.0001
train, sngd, lr=0.00015
test, sngd, lr=0.00015
train, sngd, lr=0.0002
test, sngd, lr=0.0002
train, sngd, lr=0.00025
test, sngd, lr=0.00025
train, sngd, lr=0.0003
test, sngd, lr=0.0003Figure 28: Negative log-likelihoods on the train and test sets during training using Adam and Stochastic
Natural Gradient (SNGD) methods on the MNIST classiﬁcation task with a Bayesian neural network
with one hidden layer of 500 rectiﬁed linear units. The ﬁnal performance of all settings are shown in
ﬁg. 29. For both Adam and SNGD, the performance highly depends on the learning rate, but the best
learning rates for both methods give similar train and test results and yield similar convergence. Note
that while Adam adaptively changes the learning rate based on the gradient statistics, SNGD employs
a ﬁxed step size. See text for more details. Best viewed in colour.
75
Figure 29: Performance on the train set [left] and test set [right] after 800 epochs using Adam and Stochastic Natural Gradient (SNGD)
methods on the MNIST classiﬁcation task with a Bayesian neural network with one hidden layer of 500 rectiﬁed linear units, and the
typical performance traces as training progress [inset plots]. This ﬁgure summarizes the full results in ﬁgs. 27 and 28. The performance
is measured using the classiﬁcation error [error] and the negative log-likelihood [nll], and for both measures, lower is better and, as such,
closer to the bottom left is better. Full training and test performance results are included in the appendix. For both Adam and SNGD, the
performance highly depends on the learning rate, but the best learning rates for both methods give similar train and test results and yield
similar convergence. Note that while Adam adaptively changes the learning rate based on the gradient statistics, SNGD employs a ﬁxed step
size. See text for more details. Best viewed in colour.
76