Title: Detecting Emergent Intersectional Biases: Contextualized Word Embeddings Contain a Distribution of Human-like Biases

Detecting Emergent Intersectional Biases:
Contextualized Word Embeddings Contain a Distribution of Human-like Biases
Wei Guo1and Aylin Caliskan1, 2
1George Washington University
1Department of Computer Science
2Institute for Data, Democracy & Politics
weiguo@gwu.edu and aylin@gwu.edu
Abstract
With the starting point that implicit human biases are
reﬂected in the statistical regularities of language, it
is possible to measure biases in English static word
embeddings. State-of-the-art neural language models
generate dynamic word embeddings dependent on the
context in which the word appears. Current methods
measure pre-deﬁned social and intersectional biases
that appear in particular contexts deﬁned by sentence
templates. Dispensing with templates, we introduce the
Contextualized Embedding Association Test (CEAT),
that can summarize the magnitude of overall bias in
neural language models by incorporating a random-
effects model. Experiments on social and intersectional
biases show that CEAT ﬁnds evidence of all tested
biases and provides comprehensive information on
the variance of effect magnitudes of the same bias in
different contexts. All the models trained on English
corpora that we study contain biased representations.
GPT-2 contains the smallest magnitude of overall bias
followed by GPT, BERT, and then ELMo, negatively
correlating with how contextualized the models are.
Furthermore, we develop two methods, Intersectional
Bias Detection (IBD) and Emergent Intersectional Bias
Detection (EIBD), to automatically identify the in-
tersectional biases and emergent intersectional biases
from static word embeddings in addition to measuring
them in contextualized word embeddings. We present
the ﬁrst algorithmic bias detection ﬁndings on how
intersectional group members are strongly associated
with unique emergent biases that do not overlap with
the biases of their constituent minority identities. IBD
achieves an accuracy of 81.6% and 82.7%, respectively,
when detecting the intersectional biases of African
American females and Mexican American females,
where the random correct identiﬁcation rates are 14.3%
and 13.3%. EIBD reaches an accuracy of 84.7% and
65.3%, respectively, when detecting the emergent inter-
sectional biases unique to African American females
and Mexican American females, where the random
correct identiﬁcation rates are 9.2% and 6.1%. Our re-
sults indicate that intersectional biases associated with
members of multiple minority groups, such as African
American females and Mexican American females,
have the highest magnitude across all neural language
models.Introduction
State-of-the-art off-the-shelf neural language models such
as the multi-million dollar GPT-3, associates men with com-
petency and occupations demonstrating higher levels of ed-
ucation, in downstream natural language processing (NLP)
tasks such as sequence prediction (Brown et al. 2020). When
GPT-3’s user interface for academic access is prompted for
language generation with the input “What is the gender of a
doctor,” the ﬁrst answer is “A: Doctor is a masculine noun;”
whereas when prompted with “What is the gender of a nurse,”
the ﬁrst answer is “It’s female.” Propagation of social group
bias in NLP applications such as automated resume screening,
that shapes the workforce by making consequential decisions
about job candidates, would not only perpetuate existing bi-
ases but potentially exacerbate harmful bias in society to
affect future generations (De-Arteaga et al. 2019; Raghavan
and Barocas). To enhance transparency in NLP, we use the
representations of words learned from word co-occurrence
statistics to discover social biases. Our methods uncover
unique intersectional biases associated with individuals that
are members of multiple minority groups. After identifying
these emergent biases, we use numeric representations of
words that vary according to neighboring words to analyze
how prominent bias is in different contexts. Recent work has
shown that human-like biases are embedded in the statistical
regularities of language that are learned by word represen-
tations, namely word embeddings (Caliskan, Bryson, and
Narayanan 2017; Blodgett et al. 2020). We build a method on
this work to automatically identify intersectional biases, such
as the ones associated with African American and Mexican
American women from static word embeddings (SWE). Then,
we measure how human-like biases manifest themselves in
contextualized word embeddings (CWE), which are dynamic
word representations generated by neural language models
that adapt to their context.
Artiﬁcial intelligence systems are known not only to per-
petuate social biases, but they may also amplify existing
cultural assumptions and inequalities (Campolo et al. 2017).
While most work on biases in word embeddings focuses
on a single social category (e.g., gender, race) (Caliskan,
Bryson, and Narayanan 2017; Bolukbasi et al. 2016; Garg
et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2018; Gonen and Goldberg 2019),
the lack of work on identifying intersectional biases, the bias
associated with populations deﬁned by multiple categories
(Cabrera et al.), leads to an incomplete measurement of so-
cial biases (Hancock 2007; Hurtado and Sinha 2008). For
example, Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan (2017)’s Word
Embedding Association Test (WEAT) quantiﬁes biases docu-
mented by the validated psychological methodology of the
Implicit Association Test (IAT) (Greenwald, McGhee, and
Schwartz 1998; Greenwald, Nosek, and Banaji 2003). The
IAT provides the sets of words to represent social groups
and attributes to be used while measuring bias. Consequently,
the analysis of bias via WEAT is limited to the types of
IATs and their corresponding words contributed by the IAT
literature, which happens to include intersectional represen-
tation for only African American women. To overcome these
constraints of WEATs, we extend WEAT to automatically
identify attributes associated with individuals that are mem-
bers of more than one social group. While this allows us to
discover emergent intersectional biases, it is also a promising
step towards automatically identifying all biased associations
embedded in the regularities of language. To ﬁll the gap in
understanding the complex nature of intersectional bias, we
develop a method called Intersectional Bias Detection (IBD)
to automatically identify intersectional biases without relying
on pre-deﬁned attribute sets from the IAT literature.
Biases associated with intersectional group members con-
tain emergent elements that do not overlap with the biases
of their constituent minority identities (Ghavami and Peplau
2013; Arrington-Sanders et al. 2015). For example, "hair
weaves" is stereotypically associated with African Amer-
ican females but not with African Americans or females.
We extend IBD and introduce a method called Emergent
Intersectional Bias Detection (EIBD) to identify the emer-
gent intersectional biases of an intersectional group in SWE.
Then, we construct new tests to quantify these intersectional
and emergent biases in CWE. To investigate the inﬂuence
of different contexts, we use a ﬁll-in-the-blank task called
masked language modeling. The goal of the task is to gen-
erate the most probable substitution for the [MASK] that is
surrounded with neighboring context words in a given sen-
tence. BERT, a widely used language model trained on this
task, substitutes [MASK] in “Men/women excel in [MASK].”
with “science” and “sports”, reﬂecting stereotype-congruent
associations. However, when we feed in similar contexts
“The man/woman is known for his/her [MASK],” BERT ﬁlls
“wit” in both sentences, which indicates gender bias may not
appear in these contexts. Prior methods use templates analo-
gous to masked language modeling to measure bias in CWE
(May et al. 2019; Tan and Celis 2019; Kurita et al. 2019).
The templates are designed to substitute words from WEAT’s
sets of target words and attributes in a simple manner such as
"This is [TARGET]" or "[TARGET] is a [ATTRIBUTE]".In
this work, we propose the Contextualized Embedding Asso-
ciation Test (CEAT), a test eschewing templates and instead
generating the distribution of effect magnitudes of biases in
different contexts from a control corpus. To comprehensively
measure the social and intersectional biases in this distri-
bution, a random-effects model designed to combine effect
sizes of similar bias interventions summarizes the overall ef-
fect size of bias in the neural language model (DerSimonian
and Kacker 2007). As a result, instead of focusing on biasestemplate-based contexts, CEAT measures the distribution of
biased associations in a language model.
Contributions. In summary, this paper presents three novel
contributions along with three complementary methods
(CEAT, IBD, and EIBD) to automatically identify intersec-
tional biases as well as emergent intersectional biases in SWE,
then use these ﬁndings to measure all available types of so-
cial biases in CWE. We ﬁnd that ELMo is the most biased,
followed by BERT, then GPT, with GPT-2 being the least
biased. The overall level of bias correlated with how contex-
tualized the CWE generated by the models are. Our results
indicate that the strongest biased associations are embedded
in the representations of intersectional group members such
as African American women. Data, source code, and detailed
results are available.
Intersectional Bias Detection (IBD). We develop a novel
method for SWE to detect words that represent biases associ-
ated with intersectional group members. To our knowledge,
IBD is the ﬁrst algorithmic method to automatically iden-
tify individual words that are strongly associated with inter-
sectionality. IBD reaches an accuracy of 81.6% and 82.7%,
respectively, when evaluated on intersectional biases associ-
ated with African American females and Mexican American
females that are provided in Ghavami and Peplau (2013)’s
validation dataset. In these machine learning settings, the ran-
dom chances of correct identiﬁcation are 14.3% and 13.3%.
Currently, the validation datasets represent gender as a binary
label. Consequently, our method uses binary categorization
when evaluating for gender related biases. However, we stress
that our method generalizes to multiple categories from bi-
nary. In future work, we aim to design non-categorical meth-
ods that don’t represent individuals as members of discrete
categories compared to potentially using continuous repre-
sentations. Accordingly, we also plan to compile validation
datasets that won’t constrain our evaluation to categorical
assumptions about humans.
Emergent Intersectional Bias Detection (EIBD). We con-
tribute a novel method to identify emergent intersectional
biases that do not overlap with biases of constituent social
groups in SWE. To our knowledge, EIBD is the ﬁrst algorith-
mic method to detect the emergent intersectional biases in
word embeddings automatically. EIBD reaches an accuracy
of 84.7% and 65.3%, respectively, when validating on the
emergent intersectional biases of African American females
and Mexican American females that are provided provided
in Ghavami and Peplau (2013)’s validation dataset. In these
machine learning settings, the random chances of correct
identiﬁcation are 9.2% and 6.1%.
Contextualized Embedding Association Test (CEAT).
WEAT measures human-like biases in SWE. We extend
WEAT to the dynamic setting of neural language models
to quantify the distribution of effect magnitudes of social
and intersectional biases in contextualized word embeddings
and summarize the combined magnitude of bias by pooling
effect sizes with the validated random-effects methodology
(Hedges 1983; Borenstein, Hedges, and Rothstein). We show
that the magnitude of bias greatly varies according to the con-
text in which the stimuli of WEAT appear. Overall, the pooled
mean effect size is statistically signiﬁcant in all CEAT tests
including intersectional bias measurements and all models
contain biased representations.
Related Work
SWE are trained on word co-occurrence statistics of corpora
to generate numeric representations of words so that ma-
chines can process language (Mikolov et al. 2013; Penning-
ton, Socher, and Manning 2014). Previous work on bias in
SWE has shown that human-like biases that have been docu-
mented by the IAT are embedded in the statistical regularities
of language (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017). The
IAT (Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz 1998) is a widely
used measure of implicit bias in human subjects that quanti-
ﬁes the differential reaction time to pairing two concepts.
Analogous to the IAT, Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan
(2017) developed the WEAT to measure the biases in SWE
by quantifying the relative associations of two sets of target
words (e.g., African American and European American) that
represent social groups with two sets of polar attributes (e.g.,
pleasant and unpleasant). WEAT computes an effect size
(Cohen’sd) that is a standardized bias score and its p-value
based on a one-sided permutation test. WEAT measures bi-
ases pre-deﬁned by the IAT such as racism, sexism, ableism,
and attitude towards the elderly, as well as widely shared
non-discriminatory non-social group associations. Swinger
et al. (2019) presented an adaptation of the WEAT to identify
biases associated with clusters of names.
Regarding the biases of intersectional groups categorized
by multiple social categories, there is prior work in the so-
cial sciences focusing on the experiences of African Amer-
ican females (Crenshaw 1989; Hare-Mustin and Marecek
1988; Kahn and Yoder 1989; Thomas and Miles 1995). Buo-
lamwini et al. demonstrated intersectional accuracy dispari-
ties in commercial gender classiﬁcation in computer vision
(Buolamwini and Gebru 2018). May et al. (2019) and Tan
and Celis (2019) used the attributes presented in Caliskan,
Bryson, and Narayanan (2017) to measure emergent inter-
sectional biases of African American females in CWE. We
develop the ﬁrst algorithmic method to automatically iden-
tify intersectional bias and emergent bias attributes in SWE,
which can be measured in both SWE and CWE. Furthermore,
we construct new embedding association tests for the inter-
sectional groups. As a result, our work is the ﬁrst to discuss
biases regarding Mexican American females in word em-
beddings. Ghavami and Peplau (2013) used a free-response
procedure in human subjects to collect words that represent
intersectional biases. They show that emergent intersectional
biases exist in several gender-by-race groups in the U.S. We
use the validation dataset constructed by Ghavami and Peplau
(2013) to evaluate our methods.
Recently, neural language models, which use neural net-
works to assign probability values to sequences of words,
have achieved state-of-the-art results in NLP tasks with their
dynamic word representations, CWE (Edunov et al. 2018;
Bohnet et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019). Neural language mod-
els typically consist of an encoder that generates CWE for
each word based on its accompanying context in the input
sequence. Speciﬁcally, the collection of values on a particular
layer’s hidden units forms the CWE (Tenney et al. 2019),which has the same vector shape as a SWE. However, unlike
SWE that represent each word, including polysemous words,
with a ﬁxed vector, CWE of the same word vary according to
its context window that is encoded into its representation by
the neural language model. Ethayarajh, Duvenaud, and Hirst
(2019) demonstrate how these limitations of SWE impact
measuring gender biases. With the wide adaption of neural
language models (Edunov et al. 2018; Bohnet et al. 2018;
Yang et al. 2019), human-like biases were observed in CWE
(Kurita et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2019; May et al. 2019; Tan and
Celis 2019). To measure human-like biases in CWE, May
et al. (2019) applied the WEAT to contextualized representa-
tions in template sentences. Tan and Celis (2019) adopted the
method of May et al. (2019) by applying Caliskan, Bryson,
and Narayanan (2017)’s WEAT to the CWE of the stimuli
tokens in templates such as “This is a [TARGET]”. Kurita
et al. (2019) measured biases in BERT based on the predic-
tion probability of the attribute in a template that contains the
target and masks the attribute, e.g., [TARGET] is [MASK].
Hutchinson et al. (2020) reveal biases associated with dis-
abilities in CWE and demonstrate undesirable biases towards
mentions of disability in applications such as toxicity predic-
tion and sentiment analysis.
Nadeem, Bethke, and Reddy (2020) present a large-scale
natural language dataset in English to measure stereotypical
biases in the domains of gender, profession, race, and religion.
Their strategy cannot be directly compared to ours since it
is not aligned with our intersectional bias detection method,
which is complementary to CEAT. The majority of prior work
measures bias in a limited selection of contexts to report the
unweighted mean value of bias magnitudes, which does not
reﬂect the scope of contextualization of biases embedded in
a neural language model.
Data
Identifying and measuring intersectional and social biases in
word embeddings as well as neural language models requires
four types of data sources that are detailed in this section. (1)
SWE carry the signals for individual words that have statisti-
cally signiﬁcant biased associations with social groups and
intersectionality. Application of our methods IBD and EIBD
to SWE automatically retrieves biased associations. (2) CWE
extracted from sentence encodings of neural language mod-
els provide precise word representations that depend on the
context of word occurrence. We apply CEAT to summarize
magnitude of bias in neural language models. (3) A corpus
provides the samples of sentences used in CEAT when mea-
suring the overall bias and analyzing the variance of contexts
in CWE of neural language models. (4) Stimuli designed by
experts in social psychology represent validated concepts in
natural language including social group and intersectional
targets in addition to their corresponding attributes.
Static Word Embeddings (SWE)
We use GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) SWE
trained on the word co-occurrence statistics of the Common
Crawl corpus to automatically detect words that are highly
associated with intersectional group members. The Common
Crawl corpus consists of 840 billion tokens and more than
2 million unique vocabulary words collected from a crawl
of the world wide web. Consequently, GloVe embeddings
capture the language representation of the entire Internet pop-
ulation that contributed to its training corpus. GloVe embed-
dings learn ﬁne-grained semantic and syntactic regularities
(Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014). Caliskan, Bryson,
and Narayanan (2017) have shown that social biases are em-
bedded in the linguistic regularities learned by GloVe.
Contextualized Word Embeddings (CWE)
We generate the CWE by widely used neural language
model implementations of ELMo from https://allennlp.org/
elmo, BERT, GPT and GPT-2 from https://huggingface.co/
transformers/v2.5.0/model_doc/ (Peters et al. 2018; Devlin
et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2018, 2019). Speciﬁcally, CWE
is formed by the collection of values on a particular layer’s
hidden units in the neural language model. BERT, GPT and
GPT-2 use subword tokenization. Since GPT and GPT-2 are
unidirectional language models, CWE of the last subtokens
contain the information of the entire word (Radford et al.
2019). We use the CWE of the last subtoken in the word as
its representation in GPT and GPT-2. For consistency, we
use the CWE of the last subtoken in the word as its represen-
tation in BERT. BERT and GPT-2 provide several versions.
We use BERT-small-cased and GPT-2-117m trained on cased
English text. The sizes of the training corpora detailed below
have been veriﬁed from Aßenmacher and Heumann (2020).
We obtained academic access to GPT-3’s API which does not
provide training data or the CWE. Accordingly, we are not
able to systematically study GPT-3.
ELMo is a 2-layer bidirectional long short term mem-
ory (Bi-LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) lan-
guage model trained on the Billion Word Benchmark dataset
(Chelba et al. 2013) that takes up 9GB memory. ELMo has
93.6 million parameters. It is different from the three other
models since CWE in ELMo integrate the hidden states in all
layers instead of using the hidden states of the top layer. We
follow standard usage and compute the summation of hidden
units over all aggregated layers of the same token as its CWE
(Peters et al. 2018). CWE of ELMo have 1,024 dimensions.
BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) is a bidirectional transformer
encoder (Vaswani et al. 2017) trained on a masked language
model and next sentence prediction. BERT is trained on
BookCorpus (Zhu et al. 2015) and English Wikipedia dumps
that take up16GB memory (Bender et al. 2021). We use
BERT-small-case with 12 layers that has 110 million param-
eters. We extract the values of hidden units on the top layer
corresponding to the token as its CWE of 768 dimensions.
GPT (Radford et al. 2018) is a 12-layer transformer de-
coder trained on a unidirectional language model on Book-
Corpus that takes up 13GB memory (Zhu et al. 2015). We
use the values of hidden units on the top layer corresponding
to the token as its CWE. This implementation of GPT has
110 million parameters. The CWE have 768 dimensions.
GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019) is a transformer decoder
trained on a unidirectional language model and is a scaled-up
version of GPT. GPT-2 is trained on WebText that takes up
40GB memory (Radford et al. 2019). We use GPT-2-smallwhich has 12 layers and 117 million parameters. We use the
values of hidden units on the top layer corresponding to the
token as its CWE. CWE of GPT-2 have 768 dimensions.
We provide the source code, detailed information, and
documentation in our open source repository at https://github.
com/weiguowilliam/CEAT.
Corpus
We need a comprehensive representation of all contexts a
word can appear in naturally occurring sentences in order to
investigate how bias associated with individual words varies
across contexts. Identifying the potential contexts in which a
word can be observed is not a trivial task. Consequently, we
simulate the distribution of contexts a word appears in, by
randomly sampling sentences that the word occurs in a large
corpus.
V oigt et al. (2018) have shown that social biases are
projected into Reddit comments. Consequently, we use a
Reddit corpus to generate the distribution of contexts that
words of interest appear in. The corpus consists of 500 mil-
lion comments made in the period between 1/1/2014 and
12/31/2014. We take all the stimuli used in Caliskan, Bryson,
and Narayanan (2017)’s WEAT that measures effect size of
bias for social groups and related attributes. For each WEAT
type, we retrieve the sentences from the Reddit corpus that
contain one of these stimuli. In this way, we collect a great
variety of CWE from the Reddit corpus to measure bias com-
prehensively in a neural language model while simulating the
natural distribution of contexts in language. We discuss the
justiﬁcation of sampling 10,000 sentences from the Reddit
corpus in the upcoming sections.
Stimuli
Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan (2017)’s WEAT is inspired
by the IAT literature (Greenwald and Banaji 1995; Green-
wald, McGhee, and Schwartz 1998; Greenwald, Nosek, and
Banaji 2003) that measures implicit associations of concepts
by representing them with stimuli. Experts in social psychol-
ogy and cognitive science select stimuli which are words
typically representative of various concepts. These linguistic
or sometimes picture-based stimuli are proxies to overall rep-
resentations of concepts in cognition. Similarly, in the word
embedding space, WEAT uses these unambiguous stimuli as
semantic representations to study biased associations related
to these concepts. Since the stimuli are chosen by experts to
most accurately represent concepts, they are not polysemous
or ambiguous words. Each WEAT, designed to measure a
certain type of association or social group bias, has at least 32
stimuli. There are 8 stimuli for each one of the four concepts.
Two of these concepts represent target groups and two of
them represent polar attributes. WEAT measures the mag-
nitude of bias by quantifying the standardized differential
association or targets with attributes. The larger the set of
appropriate stimuli to represent a concept, the more statis-
tically signiﬁcant and accurate the representation becomes
(Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017).
Validation data for intersectional bias. To investigate inter-
sectional bias with respect to race and gender, we represent
members of social groups with target words provided by
WEAT and Parada et al. (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan
2017; Parada 2016). WEAT and Parada et al. represent racial
categories with frequent given names that signal group mem-
bership. WEAT contains a balanced combination of common
female and male names of African Americans and European
Americans whereas Parada et al. presents the Mexican Amer-
ican names for women and men combined. The intersectional
bias detection methods identify attributes that are associated
with these target group representations. Human subjects pro-
vide the validation set of intersectional attributes with ground
truth information in prior work (Ghavami and Peplau 2013).
The evaluation of intersectional bias detection methods uses
this validation set. One limitation of these validation sets is
the way they represent gender as a binary category. We will
address this constraint in future work by constructing our
own validation sets that won’t have to represent people by
discrete categorical labels of race and gender.
Approach
Our approach includes four components. (1) (Caliskan,
Bryson, and Narayanan 2017)’s WEAT for SWE is the foun-
dation of our approach to summarizing overall bias in CWE
generated by neural language models. (2) Random-effects
models from the meta analysis literature summarizes the com-
bined effect size for a neural language model’s CWE via com-
bining 10,000 WEAT samples by weighting each result with
the within-WEAT and between-WEAT variances (Hedges
1983). (3) Our novel method IBD automatically detects words
associated with intersectional biases. (4) Our novel method
EIBD automatically detects words that are uniquely associ-
ated with members of multiple minority or disadvantaged
groups, but do not overlap with the biases of their constituent
minority identities.
Supplementary materials includes the details of all the
bias types studied in this paper, namely, WEAT biases intro-
duced by Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan (2017) as well
as intersectional biases and their validation set introduced by
Ghavami and Peplau (2013) and Parada (2016).
Word Embedding Association Test (WEAT)
WEAT, designed by Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan (2017),
measures the effect size of bias in SWE, by quantifying the
relative associations of two sets of target words (e.g., career,
professional; and family, home) with two sets of polar at-
tributes (e.g., woman, female; and man, male). Two of these
WEATs measure baseline associations that are widely ac-
cepted such as the attitude towards ﬂowers vs. insects or the
attitude towards musical instruments vs. weapons. Human
subjects and word embeddings tend to associate ﬂowers and
musical instruments with pleasantness that corresponds to
positive valence. However, human subjects associate insects
and weapons with unpleasantness that corresponds to neg-
ative valence. Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz (1998)
refers to these as universally accepted stereotypes since they
are widely shared across human subjects and are not po-
tentially harmful to society. However, the rest of the tests
measure the magnitude of social-group associations, such as
gender and race stereotypes and attitude towards the elderlyor people with disabilities. Biased social-group associations
in word embeddings can potentially be prejudiced and harm-
ful to society. Especially, if downstream applications of NLP
that use static or dynamic word embeddings to make conse-
quential decisions about individuals, such as resume screen-
ing for job candidate selection, perpetuate existing biases
to eventually exacerbate historical injustices (De-Arteaga
et al. 2019; Raghavan and Barocas). The formal deﬁnition of
Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan (2017)’s WEAT, the test
statistic, and the statistical signiﬁcance of biased associations
are detailed in the appendices.
Intersectional Bias Detection (IBD)
IBD identiﬁes words associated with intersectional group
members, deﬁned by two social categories simultaneously.
Our method automatically detects the attributes that have
high associations with the intersectional group from a set of
SWE. Analogous to the Word Embedding Factual Associa-
tion Test (WEFAT) (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017),
we measure the standardized differential association of a sin-
gle stimulus w2Wwith two social groups AandBusing
the following statistic.
s(w;A;B ) =mean a2Acos(~ w;~ a) mean b2Bcos(~ w;~b)
std-dev x2A[Bcos(~ w;~ x)
We refer to the above statistic as the association score ,
which is used by WEFAT to verify that gender statistics are
embedded in linguistic regularities. Targets AandBare
words that represent males (e.g., he, him) and females (e.g.,
she, her) and Wis a set of occupations. For example, nurse
has an association score s(nurse;A;B )that measures effect
size of gender associations. WEFAT has been shown to have
high predictive validity ( = 0:90) in quantifying facts about
the world (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017).
We extend WEFAT’s gender association measurement to
quantify the relative association to other social categories
(e.g., race), by following an approach similar to lexicon in-
duction that quantiﬁes certain associations without annotating
large-scale ground truth training data (Hatzivassiloglou and
McKeown 1997; Riloff and Wiebe 2003; Turney and Littman
2003). LetPi= (Ai;Bi) (e.g., African American and Eu-
ropean American) be a pair of social groups, and Wbe a
set of attribute words. We calculate the association score
s(w;A i;Bi)forw2W. Ifs(w;A i;Bi)is greater than the
positive effect size threshold t,wis detected to be associated
with groupAi. LetWi=fwjs(w;A i;Bi)>t;w2Wgbe
the associated word list for each pair Pi.
We detect the biased attributes associated with an intersec-
tional group Cmndeﬁned by two social categories C1n;Cm1
withMandNsubcategories ( C11;:::;C mn) (e.g., African
American females by race ( C1n) and gender ( Cm1)). We
assume, there are three racial categories M= 3, and two
gender categories N= 2 in our experiments because of
the limited structure of representation for individuals in
the validation dataset as well as the stimuli. We plan to
extend these methods to non-binary individuals and non-
categorical representations. However, precisely validating
such an approach would require us to construct the corre-
sponding validation sets, which currently don’t exist. Gener-
alizing the method to represent humans with continuous
values as opposed to categorical group labels is left to
future work. There are in total MNcombinations of
intersectional groups Cmn. We use all groups Cmnto build
WEFAT pairs Pij= (C11;Cij);i= 1;:::;M;j = 1;:::;N .
Then, we detect lists of words associated with each pair
Wij;i= 1;:::;M;j = 1;:::;N based on threshold tde-
termined by an ROC curve. We detect the attributes highly
associated with the intersectional group, for example C 11,
from all (MN)WEFAT pairs. We deﬁne the words asso-
ciated with intersectional biases of group C 11asWIBand
these words are identiﬁed by
WIB=[
1iM
1jNWIBij;
whereWIBij=fwjs(w;C 11;Cij)>tmn;w2WIBmng
where
WIBmn=f([
1iM
1jNWij)[Wrandomg
W11contains validated words associated with C 11. Each W ij
contains validated words associated with one intersectional
group (Ghavami and Peplau 2013). W random contains ran-
dom words, which are stimuli taken from WEAT that are not
associated with any C ij, thus represent true negatives.
To identify the thresholds, we treat IBD as a one-vs-all ver-
iﬁcation classiﬁer in machine learning to determine whether
attributes belong to group C11. We select the threshold with
the highest value of truepositiverate falsepositiverate
(TPR FPR ). When multiple thresholds have the same
values, we select the one with the highest TPto detect more
attributes associated with C11. Detection accuracy is calcu-
lated as true positives plus true negatives over true positives
plus true negatives plus false positives plus false negatives
(TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN). The attributes which are associated with
C11and are detected as C11areTP. The attributes which
are not associated with C11and are not detected as C11are
TN. The attributes which are associated with C11but are
not detected as C11areFN. The attributes which are not
associated with C11but are detected as C11areFP.
Emergent Intersectional Bias Detection (EIBD)
EIBD identiﬁes words that are uniquely associated with in-
tersectional group members. These emergent biases are only
associated with the intersectional group (e.g., African Amer-
ican females C11) but not associated with its constituent
category such as African Americans S1nor femalesSm1.
EIBD is a modiﬁed and extended version of IBD. The formal
deﬁnition is in the appendices.
Conceptually, to detect words uniquely associated with
African American females in a set of attributes W, we as-
sume there are two classes (females, males) of gender and
two classes (African Americans, European Americans) of
race. We measure the relative association of all words in W
ﬁrst with African American females and African American
males, second with African American females and European
American females, third with African American females and
European American males. (Fourth is the comparison of thesame groups, which leads to d= 0effect size, which is al-
ways below the detection threshold.) The union of attributes
with an association score greater than the selected thresh-
old represents intersectional biases associated with African
American females. Then, we calculate the association scores
of these IBD attributes ﬁrst with females and males, sec-
ond with African Americans and European Americans. We
remove the attributes with scores greater than the selected
threshold from these IBD attributes, that are highly associ-
ated with single social categories. The union of the remaining
attributes are the emergent intersectional biases.
Contextualized Embedding Association Test
(CEAT)
CEAT quantiﬁes social biases in CWE by extending the
WEAT methodology that measures human-like biases in
SWE (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan 2017). WEAT’s bias
metric is effect size (Cohen’s d). In CWE, since embeddings
of the same word vary based on context, applying WEAT to
a biased set of CWE will not measure bias comprehensively.
To deal with a range of dynamic embeddings representing
individual words, CEAT measures the distribution of effect
sizes that are embedded in a neural language model.
In WEAT’s formal deﬁnition (Caliskan, Bryson, and
Narayanan 2017), XandYare two sets of target words
of equal size; AandBare two sets of evaluative polar at-
tribute words of equal size. Each word in these sets of words
is referred to as a stimulus. Let cos(~ a;~b)stand for the co-
sine similarity between vectors ~ aand~b. WEAT measures the
magnitude of bias by computing the effect size ( ES) which
is the standardized differential association of the targets and
attributes. The p-value (Pw) of WEAT measures the proba-
bility of observing the effect size in the null hypothesis, in
case biased associations did not exist. According to Cohen’s
effect size metric, d>j0:5jandd>j0:8jare medium and
large effect sizes, respectively (Rice and Harris 2005).
In a neural language model, each stimulus sfrom WEAT
contained in nsinput sentences has at most nsdifferent CWE
~ s1;:::; ~ s nsdepending on the context in which it appears. If
we calculate effect size ES(X;Y;A;B )with all different ~ s
for a stimulus s2Xand keep the CWE for other stimuli
unchanged, there will be at most nsdifferent values of ef-
fect size. For example, if we assume each stimulus soccurs
in 2 contexts and each set in X;Y;A;B has 5 stimuli, the
total number of combinations for all the CWE of stimuli
will be 254= 1;048;576. The numerous possible values
ofES(X;Y;A;B )construct a distribution of effect sizes,
therefore we extend WEAT to CEAT.
For each CEAT, all the sentences, where a CEAT stimu-
lus occurs, are retrieved from the Reddit corpus. Then, we
generate the corresponding CWE from these sentences with
randomly varying contexts. In this way, we generate nsCWE
fromnsextracted sentences for each stimulus s, wherenscan
vary according to the contextual variance of each stimulus.
We sample random combinations of CWE for each stimulus
Ntimes. In the ithsample out of N, for each stimulus that
appears in at least Nsentences, we randomly sample one of
its CWE vectors without replacement. If a stimulus occurs
in less than Nsentences, especially when Nis very large,
we randomly sample from its CWE vectors with replacement
so that they can be reused while preserving their distribution.
We provide the analysis and extended results in the appen-
dices for both N= 1;000andN= 10;000, which result in
similar bias magnitudes. Based on the sampled CWEs, we
calculate each sample’s effect size ESi(X;Y;A;B ), sam-
ple variance Vi(X;Y;A;B )andp-valuePwi(X;Y;A;B )in
WEAT. Then, we generate Nof these samples to approximate
the distribution of effect sizes via CEAT.
The distribution of bias effects in CEAT represents random
effects computed by WEAT where we do not expect to ob-
serve the same effect size due to variance in context (Hedges
1983). As a result, in order to provide comprehensive sum-
mary statistics, we applied a random-effects model from the
validated meta-analysis literature to compute the weighted
mean of the effect sizes and statistical signiﬁcance (Rosen-
thal and DiMatteo 2002; Borenstein, Hedges, and Rothstein).
The summary of the effect magnitude of a particular bias in a
neural language model, namely combined effect size (CES),
is the weighted mean of a distribution of random effects,
CES (X;Y;A;B ) =PN
i=1viESiPN
i=1vi
whereviis the inverse of the sum of in-sample variance Vi
and between-sample variance in the distribution of random ef-
fects2
between . Methodological details are in the appendices.
Random-Effects Model
Meta-analysis is the statistical procedure for combining
data from multiple studies (Hedges and Vevea 1998). Meta-
analysis describes the results of each separate study by a
numerical index (e.g., effect size) and then summarizes the
results into combined statistics. In bias measurements, we
are dealing with effect size. Based on different assump-
tions whether the effect size is ﬁxed or not, there are two
kinds of methods: ﬁxed-effects model and random-effects
model. Fixed-effects model expects results with ﬁxed-effect
sizes from different intervention studies. On the other hand,
random-effects model treats the effect size as they are sam-
ples from a random distribution of all possible effect sizes
(DerSimonian and Laird 1986; Hedges and Olkin 2014).
The expected results of different intervention studies in the
random-effects model don’t have to match other studies’ re-
sults. In our case, since the effect sizes calculated with the
CWE in different contexts are expected to vary, we cannot as-
sume a ﬁxed-effects model. Instead, we use a random-effects
model that is appropriate for the type of data we are studying.
We apply a random-effects model from the validated meta-
analysis literature using the methods of Hedges and Vevea
(1998). Speciﬁcally, we describe the procedures for estimat-
ing the comprehensive summary statistic, combined effect
size (CES) , which is the weighted mean of a distribution
of random-effect sizes. Each effect size is weighted by the
variance in calculating that particular effect size in addition
to the overall variance among all the random-effect sizes.
We combine effect size estimates from Nindependent
WEATs. The details of CES are in the appendices.Results and Evaluation
We measure ten types of social biases via WEAT (C1-C10)
and construct our own intersectional bias tests in ELMo,
BERT, GPT, and GPT-2. Accordingly, we present four novel
intersectional bias tests via IBD and EIBD for studying
African American, European American, and Mexican Ameri-
can men and women.
We use the stimuli introduced in Section to represent the
target groups. For intersectional and emergent bias tests, we
use the attributes associated with the intersectional minority
or disadvantaged group members vs the majority European
American males as the two polar attribute sets. We sample
N= 10;000combinations of CWE for each CEAT since
according to various evaluation trials, the resulting CES and
p-value remain consistent under this parameter.
Evaluation of IBD and EIBD
We use IBD and EIBD to automatically detect and retrieve
the intersectional and emergent biases associated with inter-
sectional group members (e.g., African American females,
Mexican American females) in GloVe SWE. To evaluate our
methods IBD and EIBD, we use validated stimuli provided
in prior work that represents each social group with frequent
given names, as explained in Section . IBD and EIBD ex-
periments use the same test set consisting of 98 attributes
associated with 2 groups deﬁned by gender (females, males),
3 groups deﬁned by race (African American, European Amer-
ican, Mexican American), 6 intersectional groups in total
deﬁned by race and gender, in addition to random words
taken from WEAT not associated with any group (Ghavami
and Peplau 2013). These random words represent the true
negatives for evaluating the identiﬁcation task.
We draw the ROC curves of four bias detection tasks in
Figure 2, then select the highest value of TPR FPR as
thresholds for each intersectional group. IBD achieves an
accuracy of 81.6% and 82.7%, respectively, when detect-
ing the intersectional biases of African American females
and Mexican American females, where the random correct
identiﬁcation rates are 14.3% and 13.3%. EIBD reaches an
accuracy of 84.7% and 65.3%, respectively, when detecting
the emergent intersectional biases unique to African Ameri-
can females and Mexican American females. The probability
of random correct attribute detection in EIBD tasks are 9.2%
and 6.1%. Intersectional biases have the highest magnitude
compared to other biases across all language models, po-
tentially disadvantaging members that belong to multiple
minority groups in downstream applications.
The current validation set with ground truth information
about each word constrains our evaluation to a closed-world
machine learning classiﬁcation task, where we know the cate-
gory each stimulus belongs to. On the other hand, evaluating
the entire semantic space resembles an open-world machine
learning problem where millions of stimuli in the entire word
embedding vocabulary belong to unknown categories, thus
require human-subject annotation studies. In future work, a
human subject study can further evaluate the threshold selec-
tion criteria, which would require validating a large set of
biases retrieved from the entire vocabulary.
2.0
 1.6
 1.2
 0.8
 0.4
 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0
Effect Size(d) of MF emergent bias in Elmo0.000.060.120.180.240.300.36 Frequency
2.0
 1.6
 1.2
 0.8
 0.4
 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0
Effect Size(d) of MF emergent bias in GPT-20.000.020.040.060.080.100.12 Frequency0.20.40.60.8P-value (p)
Figure 1: Distributions of effect sizes with ELMo (CES d= 1:51) and GPT-2 (CES d= 0:32) for emergent intersectional bias CEAT test
I4. Test I4, after identifying the emergent and intersectional biases associated with Mexican American females and European American males
(MF/EM) via IBD and EIBD in word embeddings, CEAT measures the overall distribution of biased associations for the retrieved stimuli in the
neural language models. This example is chosen to demonstrate how different models exhibit varying degrees of bias when using the same set
of stimuli to measure bias. The height of each bar shows the frequency of observed effect sizes among 10,000 effect size samples of a particular
bias type that fall in each bin. The color coded bars stand for the average p-value of all effect sizes corresponding to that bin.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False positive rate0.00.20.40.60.81.0True positive rate
AF intersectional bias
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False positive rate0.00.20.40.60.81.0True positive rate
AF emerg inter bias
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False positive rate0.00.20.40.60.81.0True positive rate
MF intersectional bias
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False positive rate0.00.20.40.60.81.0True positive rate
MF emerg inter bias
Figure 2: ROC curves of IBD and EIBD for African American females (AF) and Mexican American females (MF). The
value that maximizes the truepositiverate  falsepositiverate is selected as the optimal threshold marked with a dot.
‘emerg inter bias’ stands for emergent intersectional bias.
Evaluation of CEAT
Congruent with Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan (2017)’s
WEAT ﬁndings, Table 1 presents signiﬁcant effect sizes for
all previously documented and validated biases. GPT-2 ex-
hibited less bias than other neural language models. Our
method CEAT, designed for CWEs, computes the combined
bias score of a distribution of effect sizes present in neural
language models. We ﬁnd that the effect magnitudes of biases
reported by Tan and Celis (Tan and Celis 2019) are individ-
ual samples in the distributions generated by CEAT. We can
view their method as a special case of CEAT that calculates
the individual bias scores of a few pre-selected samples. In
order to comprehensively measure the overall bias score in
a neural language model, we apply a random-effects model
from the meta-analysis literature that computes combined
effect size and combined statistical signiﬁcance from a distri-
bution of bias measurements. As a result, when CEAT reports
signiﬁcant results, some of the corresponding bias scores in
prior work are not statistically signiﬁcant. Furthermore, our
results indicate statistically signiﬁcant bias in the opposite
direction in some cases. These negative results suggest that
some WEAT stimuli tend to occur in stereotype-incongruent
contexts more frequently.
We sampled combinations of CWE 10;000times for each
CEAT test; nonetheless, we observed varying intensities of
the same social bias in different contexts. Using a completely
random set vs ﬁxed set of contexts derived from 10;000
sentences lead to low variance in corresponding bias scores.
Using a ﬁxed set of contexts for each model makes it possi-
ble to evaluate the magnitude of bias across models for the
same variables. Experiments conducted with 1;000,5;000,
10;000samples of CWE lead to similar bias scores with lowvariance. As a result, the number of samples can be adjusted
according to computational resources. However, future work
on evaluating the lower bound of sampling size with respect
to model and corpus characteristics would optimize the sam-
pling process. Accordingly, the computation of overall bias
in the language model would become more efﬁcient.
IBD, EIBD, and CEAT Results
We report the overall magnitude of bias (CES) and p-value
in Table 1. We pick an example from Table 1 that reﬂects the
great disparity in bias magnitudes between the two models.
We present the distribution histograms of effect sizes in Fig-
ure 1, which show the overall biases that can be measured
with a comprehensive contextualized bias test related to the
emergent biases associated with occurrences of stimuli un-
ambiguously regarding Mexican American females (See row
I4 in Table 1) with ELMo and GPT-2. The distribution plots
for other bias tests are provided in our project repository.
We ﬁnd that CEAT uncovers more evidence of intersec-
tional bias than gender or racial biases. This ﬁndings suggest
that, members of multiple minority or disadvantaged groups
are associated with the strongest levels of bias in neural lan-
guage representations. To quantify the intersectional biases
in CWEs, we construct tests I1-I4. Tests with Mexican Amer-
ican females tend to have stronger bias with a higher CES
than those with African American females. Speciﬁcally, 13 of
16 instances in intersection-related tests (I1-I4) have signiﬁ-
cant stereotype-congruent CES; 9 of 12 instances in gender-
related tests (C6-C8) have signiﬁcant stereotype-congruent
CES; 8 of 12 instances in race-related tests (C3-C5) have
signiﬁcant stereotype-congruent CES. In gender bias tests,
the gender associations with career and family are stronger
TestELMo BERT GPT GPT-2
d p d p d p d p
C1:Flowers/Insects random 1.40<10 300.97<10 301.04<10 300.14<10 30
Pleasant/Unpleasantﬁxed 1.35<10 300.64<10 301.01<10 300.21<10 30
C2:Instruments/Weapons random 1.56<10 300.94<10 301.12<10 30-0.27<10 30
Pleasant/Unpleasantﬁxed 1.59<10 300.54<10 301.09<10 30-0.21<10 30
C3:EA/AA names random 0.49<10 300.44<10 30-0.11<10 30-0.19<10 30
Pleasant/Unpleasantﬁxed 0.47<10 300.31<10 30-0.10<10 300.09<10 30
C4:EA/AA names random 0.15<10 300.47<10 300.01<10 2-0.23<10 30
Pleasant/Unpleasantﬁxed 0.23<10 300.49<10 300.00 0:20 -0.13<10 30
C5:EA/AA names random 0.11<10 300.02<10 70.07<10 30-0.21<10 30
Pleasant/Unpleasantﬁxed 0.17<10 300.07<10 300.04<10 27-0.01 0.11
C6:Males/Female names random 1.27<10 300.92<10 300.19<10 300.36<10 30
Career/Family ﬁxed 1.31<10 300.41<10 300.11<10 300.34<10 30
C7:Math/Arts random 0.64<10 300.41<10 300.24<10 30-0.01<10 2
Male/Female terms ﬁxed 0.71<10 300.20<10 300.23<10 30-0.14<10 30
C8:Science/Arts random 0.33<10 30-0.07<10 300.26<10 30-0.16<10 30
Male/Female terms ﬁxed 0.51<10 300.17<10 300.35<10 30-0.05<10 30
C9:Mental/Physical disease random 1.00<10 300.53<10 300.08<10 290.10<10 30
Temporary/Permanent ﬁxed 1.01<10 300.40<10 30-0.23<10 30-0.21<10 30
C10:Young/Old people’s names random 0.11<10 30-0.01 0.016 0.07<10 30-0.16<10 30
Pleasant/Unpleasantﬁxed 0.24<10 300.07<10 300.04<10 17-0.14<10 30
I1:AF/EM names random 1.24<10 300.77<10 300.07<10 300.02<10 2
AF/EM intersectional ﬁxed 1.25<10 300.98<10 300.23<10 30-0.19<10 30
I2:AF/EM names random 1.25<10 300.67<10 30-0.09<10 300.02<10 2
AF emergent/EM intersectional ﬁxed 1.27<10 301.00<10 300.23<10 30-0.14<10 30
I3:MF/EM names random 1.31<10 300.68<10 30-0.06<10 300.38<10 30
MF/EM intersectional ﬁxed 1.29<10 300.51<10 300.00 0.81 0.32<10 30
I4:MF/EM names random 1.51<10 300.86<10 300.16<10 30-0.32<10 30
MF emergent/EM intersectional ﬁxed 1.43<10 300.58<10 300.20<10 30-0.25<10 30
Pleasant and unpleasant attributes used to measure valence and attitudes towards targets from Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz (1998).Table 1: CEAT measures of social and
intersectional biases in language mod-
els. We report the overall magnitude
of bias in language models with CES
(d, rounded down) and statistical sig-
niﬁcance with combined p-values (p,
rounded up). CES pools N= 10;000
samples from a random-effects model.
The ﬁrst row for each bias test uses com-
pletely random samples, whereas the sec-
ond row for the bias test uses the same
sentences to generate CWE across all
neural language models. Cistands for
theithWEAT in Caliskan, Bryson, and
Narayanan (2017)’s Table 1. Iistands for
our tests constructed for measuring inter-
sectional biases. A_stands for African
Americans,E_for European Americans,
M_for Mexican Americans, _Ffor fe-
males, and _Mfor males. Light, medium,
and dark gray shading of combined dval-
ues (CES) indicates small, medium, and
large effect size, respectively.
than other biased gender associations. In all models, the sig-
niﬁcantly biased intersectionality associations have larger
effect sizes than racial biases.
According to CEAT results in Table 1, ELMo is the most
biased whereas GPT-2 is the least biased with respect to the
types of biases CEAT measures. We notice that signiﬁcant
negative CES exist in BERT, GPT and GPT-2, which imply
that stereotype-incongruent biases with small effect size exist.
Discussion
According to our ﬁndings, GPT-2 has the highest variance
in bias magnitudes followed by GPT, BERT, and ELMo (see
an example in Figure 1). The overall magnitude of bias de-
creases in the same order for the types of biases we measured.
The similar number of parameters in these models or the size
of the training corpora do not explain the distribution of bias
that we observe w.r.t. variance and overall magnitude. How-
ever, Ethayarajh (2019) note the same descending pattern
when measuring words’ self-similarity, after adjusting for
anisotropy (non-uniform directionality), across their CWE
in GPT-2, BERT, and ELMo. (ELMo is compared in three
layers due to its architecture.) Ethayarajh (2019) also ﬁnd
that upper layers of contextualizing models produce more
context-speciﬁc representations. Quantifying how contextual-
ized these dynamic embeddings are supports our ﬁndings that
the highest variance in bias magnitude, low overall bias, and
low self-similarity correlate. This correlation may explain
the results that we are observing. As more recent models
are learning highly-contextualized CWE in upper layers, the
representations in highly-contextualized layers are almost
overﬁtting to their contexts. Since words appear in numer-
ous contexts, the more contextualized and diverse a word’s
representation becomes, the less overall bias and general
stereotypical associations.We present and validate a bias detection method generaliz-
able to identifying biases associated with any social group or
intersectional group member. We detect and measure biases
associated with Mexican American and African American
females in SWE and CWE. Our emergent intersectional bias
measurement results for African American females are in line
with previous ﬁndings (May et al. 2019; Tan and Celis 2019).
IBD and EIBD can detect intersectional biases from SWE
with high accuracy in an unsupervised manner by following
a lexicon induction strategy (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown
1997). This approach can be complementary to the stimuli list
predeﬁned by social psychologists. Our current intersectional
bias detection validation approach can be used to identify as-
sociation thresholds when generalizing this work to the entire
word embedding dictionary. Exploring all the potential biases
associated with targets is left to future work since it requires
extensive human subject validation studies in collaboration
with social psychologists. We list all the stimuli representing
biased associations in the supplementary materials. To name
a few, the superset of intersectional biases associated with
African American females are: aggressive, assertive, athletic,
bigbutt, conﬁdent, darkskinned, fried-chicken, ghetto, loud,
overweight, promiscuous, unfeminine, unintelligent, unre-
ﬁned. Emergent intersectional biases associated with African
American females are: aggressive, assertive, bigbutt, conﬁ-
dent, darkskinned, fried-chicken, overweight, promiscuous,
unfeminine. The superset of intersectional biases associated
with Mexican American females are: attractive, cook, curvy,
darkskinned, feisty, hardworker, loud, maids, promiscuous,
sexy, short, uneducated, unintelligent. Emergent intersec-
tional biases associated with Mexican American females are:
cook, curvy, feisty, maids, promiscuous, sexy.
We follow the conventional method of using the most fre-
quent given names in a social group that signal group mem-
bership in order to accurately represent targets (Caliskan,
Bryson, and Narayanan 2017; Greenwald, McGhee, and
Schwartz 1998). Our results indicate that the conventional
method that relies on stimuli selected by experts in social
psychology works accurately. Prior work on lexicon induc-
tion methods compensates for the lack of existing annotated
data on valence (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown 1997; Riloff
and Wiebe 2003; Turney and Littman 2003). Nevertheless,
principled and robust lexicon induction methods that can
be validated in this domain, when measuring the representa-
tion accuracy of target group lexica or any semantic concept.
Developing these principled methods is left to future work.
Semantics of languages can be represented by the distribu-
tional statistics of word co-occurrences (Firth 1957; Harris
1954). Consequently, our methods are language agnostic and
can be applied to neural language models as well as word em-
beddings in any language as long as the stimuli for accurately
representing the semantics of concepts are available. Project
Implicit (https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit) has been host-
ing IATs for human subjects all over the world in numerous
languages for two decades. As a result, their IATs, that in-
spired WEATs, provide stimuli for targets and attributes in
numerous languages. We leave generalizing our methods to
other languages to future work since state-of-the-art neural
language models are not widely or freely available for lan-
guages other than English as of 2021.
When simulating contexts for WEAT, we make an assump-
tion that the Reddit corpus represents naturally occurring
sentences. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that the Reddit cor-
pus also reﬂects the biases of the underlying population con-
tributing to its corpus. Studying the accuracy of simulating
the most common distribution of contexts and co-occurring
stimuli is left to future work since we don’t have validated
ground truth data for evaluating the distribution parameters
of contexts in large-scale corpora. Instead, for evaluation, val-
idation, and comparison, we rely on validated ground truth
information about biases documented by Caliskan, Bryson,
and Narayanan (2017) in word embeddings as well as biases
documented by millions of people over decades via the im-
plicit association literature (Nosek, Banaji, and Greenwald
2002) and Ghavami and Peplau (2013)’s intersectional biases.
Given the energy and funding considerations, we are not
able to train these language models on the same large-scale
corpora to compare how a neural language model’s architec-
ture learns biases, because the training processes for these
models are computationally and ﬁnancially expensive (Ben-
der et al. 2021). The size of state-of-the-art models increase
by at least a factor of 10 every year. BERT-Large from 2018
has 355 million parameters, GPT-2 from early 2019 reaches
1.5 billion, and GPT-3 from mid-2020 ﬁnally gets to 175 bil-
lion parameters. The GPT-2 model used 256 Google Cloud
TPU v3 cores for training, which costs 256 US dollars per
hour. GPT-2 requires approximately 168 hours or 1 week
of training on 32 TPU v3 chips (Strubell, Ganesh, and Mc-
Callum 2019). GPT-3 is estimated to cost 12 million US
dollars (Floridi and Chiriatti 2020) and we are not able to
get access to its embeddings or training corpora. Regardless,
measuring the scope of biases with validated bias quantiﬁca-
tion and meta-analysis methods, we are able to compare thebiased associations learned by neural language models that
are widely used. Being able to study neural language models
comprehensively is critical since they are replacing SWE in
many NLP applications due to their high accuracy in various
machine learning tasks.
We would like to conclude the discussion with our ethical
concerns regarding the dual use of IBD and EIBD, that can
detect stereotypical associations for an intersectional group or
disadvantaged individuals. Words retrieved by our methods
may be used in the generation of offensive or stereotypical
content that perpetuates or ampliﬁes existing biases. For ex-
ample, information inﬂuence operations in the 1970s used
Osgood (1964)’s semantic differential technique among hu-
man subjects to retrieve the words that would most effectively
induce a negative attitude in a South American population
towards their administration (Landis et al. 1982). Similarly,
biased neural language models may be exploited to automate
large-scale information inﬂuence operations that intend to
sow discord among social groups Toney et al. (2020); Toney
and Caliskan (2020). The biased outputs of these language
models, that get recycled in future model generation’s train-
ing corpora, may lead to an AI bias feedback cycle.
Conclusion
We introduce methods called IBD and EIBD to identify bi-
ases associated with members of multiple minority groups.
These methods automatically detect the intersectional biases
and emergent intersectional biases captured by word embed-
dings. Intersectional biases associated with African Ameri-
can and Mexican American females have the highest effect
size compared to other social biases. Complementary to pre-
deﬁned sets of attributes to measure widely known biases, our
methods automatically discover biases. IBD reaches an ac-
curacy of 81.6% and 82.7% in detection, respectively, when
validating on the intersectional biases of African American
females and Mexican American females. EIBD reaches an ac-
curacy of 84.7% and 65.3% in detection, respectively, when
validating on the emergent intersectional biases of African
American females and Mexican American females.
We present CEAT to measure biases identiﬁed by IBD
and EIBD in language models. CEAT uses a random-effects
model to comprehensively measure social biases embedded in
neural language models that contain a distribution of context-
dependent biases. CEAT simulates this distribution by sam-
pling (N= 10;000) combinations of CWEs without replace-
ment from a large-scale natural language corpus. Unlike prior
work that focuses on a limited number of contexts deﬁned
by templates to measure the magnitude of particular biases,
CEAT provides a comprehensive measurement of overall
bias in contextualizing language models. Our results indicate
that ELMo is the most biased, followed by BERT, and GPT.
GPT-2 is the least biased language model with respect to the
social biases we investigate. The overall magnitude of bias
negatively correlates with the level of contextualization in
the language model. Understanding how the architecture of
a language model contributes to biased and contextualized
word representations can help mitigate the harmful effects to
society in downstream applications.
Appendices
Formal Deﬁnition of WEAT
We present a formal deﬁnition of Caliskan, Bryson, and
Narayanan (2017)’s WEAT. Let XandYbe two sets of
target words of equal size, and A,Bbe two sets of attribute
words. Letcos(~ a;~b)stand for the cosine similarity between
the embeddings of words aandb. Here, the vector ~ ais the
embedding for word a. The test statistic is
s(X;Y;A;B ) =X
x2Xs(x;A;B ) X
y2Ys(y;A;B )
where
s(w;A;B ) =mean a2Acos(~ w;~ a) mean b2Bcos(~ w;~b)
A permutation test calculates the statistical signiﬁcance of
associations(X;Y;A;B ). The one-sided p value is
P=Pri[s(Xi;Yi;A;B )>s(X;Y;A;B ))]
wheref(Xi;Yi)girepresents all the partitions of X[Yin
two sets of equal size. Random permutations of these stimuli
sets represent the null hypothesis as if the biased associations
did not exist so that we can perform a statistical signiﬁcance
test by measuring the unlikelihood of the null hypothesis,
given the effect size of WEAT.
The effect size of bias is calculated as
ES=mean x2Xs(x;A;B ) mean y2Ys(y;A;B )
std_devw2XSYs(w;A;B )
Formal Deﬁnition of EIBD
We ﬁrst detect C11’s intersectional biases WIBwith IBD.
Then, we detect the biased attributes associated with only
one constituent category of the intersectional group C11(e.g.,
associated only with race S1n- or only with gender Sm1).
Each intersectional category C1nhas M constituent subcate-
goriesSin;i= 1;:::M and category Cm1has N constituent
subcategories Smj;j= 1;:::;N .S1nandSm1are the con-
stituent subcategories of intersectional group C11.
There are in total M+Ngroups deﬁned by all the sin-
gle constituent subcategories. We use all M+Ngroups
to build WEFAT pairs Pi= (S1n;Sin);i= 1;:::;M
andPj= (Sm1;Smj);j= 1;:::N . Then, we detect lists
of words associated with each pair Wi;i= 1;:::M and
Wj;j= 1;:::;N based on the same positive threshold tmn
used in IBD. We detect the attributes highly associated with
the constituent subcategories S1nandSm1of the target in-
tersectional group C11from all (M+N)WEFAT pairs. We
deﬁne the words associated with emergent intersectional bi-
ases of group C11asWEIB and these words are identiﬁed
by the formula
WEIB= (M[
i=1(WIB Wi))[
(N[
j=1(WIB Wj))
whereWi=fwjs(w;S 1n;Sin)>tmn;w2WIBg
andWj=fwjs(w;Sm1;Smj)>tmn;w2WIBgRandom-Effects Model Details
Each effect size is calculated by
ESi=mean x2Xs(x;A;B ) mean y2Ys(y;A;B )
std_devw2XSYs(w;A;B )
The estimation of in-sample variance is Vi, which is the
square ofstd_devw2XSYs(w;A;B ). We use the same prin-
ciple as estimation of the variance components in ANOV A
to measure the between-sample variance 2
between , which is
calculated as:
2
between =8
<
:Q (N 1)
cif QN 1
0 if Q<N 1
where
Wi=1
Vi
c=X
Wi PW2
iPWi&Q=X
WiES2
i (PWiESi)2
PWi
The weight viassigned to each WEAT is the inverse
of the sum of estimated in-sample variance Viand esti-
mated between-sample variance in the distribution of random-
effects2
between .
vi=1
Vi+2
between
CES, which is the sum of the weighted effect sizes divided
by the sum of all weights, is then computed as
CES =PN
i=1viESiPN
i=1vi
To derive the hypothesis test, we calculate the standard
error (SE) of CES as the square root of the inverse of the sum
of the weights.
SE(CES ) =s
1PN
i=1vi
Based on the central limit theorem, the limiting form of the
distribution ofCES
SE(CES )is the standard normal distribution
(Montgomery and Runger 2010). Since we notice that some
CES are negative, we use a two-tailed p value which can
test the signiﬁcance of biased associations in two directions.
The two-tailed p value of the hypothesis that there is no
difference between all the contextualized variations of the
two sets of target words in terms of their relative similarity
to two sets of attribute words is given by the following for-
mula, where is the standard normal cumulative distribution
function and SEstands for the standard error.
Pcombined (X;Y;A;B ) = 2[1 (jCES
SE(CES )j)]
Meta-Analysis Details for CEAT
In this section, we ﬁrst construct all CEAT in the main paper
(C1-C10,I1-I4) with sample size N= 1;000to provide a
comparison of results with different sample sizes. We report
CESdand combined p valuep in Table 2. We replicate
these results with N= 1;000instead of using the original
N= 10;000to show that even with N= 1;000, we get
valid results. Accordingly, we proceed to calculate all types
of biases associated with intersectional groups based on the
attributes used in original WEAT. We notice that there are
ﬁve tests which are signiﬁcant with sample size N= 10;000
but insigniﬁcant with sample size N= 1;000. They are C10
with Bert, C4 with GPT, C7 with GPT-2, I3 with GPT-2 and
I4 with GPT-2. We also notice that CES of same test can be
different with different sample size but all differences are
smaller than 0:1.
We also construct four types of supplementary CEAT
for all pairwise combinations of six intersectional groups:
African American females (AF), African American males
(AM), Mexican American females (MF), Mexican American
males (MM), European American females (EF), European
American males (EM). We use two intersectional groups as
two target social groups. For each pairwise combination, we
build four CEAT : ﬁrst, measure attitudes with words rep-
resenting pleasantness and unpleasantness as two attribute
groups (as in C1); second, measure career and family associ-
ations that are particularly important in gender stereotypes
with the corresponding two attribute groups (as in C6); third,
similar to the career-family stereotypes for gender, measure
math and arts associations that are particularly important
in gender stereotypes with the corresponding two attribute
groups (as in C7); fourth, similar to the math-arts stereotypes
for gender, measure science (STEM) and arts associations
that are particularly important in gender stereotypes with the
corresponding two attribute groups (as in C8). We report the
CES (d) and combined p values (p) in Table 2 with sample
sizeN= 1;000. All of these attributes are from the C1, C6,
C7 and C8 WEAT of Caliskan et al. (Caliskan, Bryson, and
Narayanan 2017).
Stimuli
The stimuli used to represent targets and attributes in CEAT
(C1-C10) are taken from Caliskan et al.(Caliskan, Bryson,
and Narayanan 2017). We construct four intersection-related
CEAT for African American females and Mexican American
females.
When conducting intersection-related CEAT , we use the
names from Caliskan et al. (Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan
2017) and Parada et al. (Parada 2016) to represent the tar-
get intersectional groups. Caliskan et al.’s WEAT provides
the female and male names of African Americans and Euro-
pean Americans from the ﬁrst Implicit Association Test in
1998 (Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz 1998). Parada et al.
provide the female and male names of Mexican Americans
(Parada 2016). To determine and verify the gender of names,
we use three gender checkers (Huang et al. 2019). We only
use the name as a target word in our experiments, if the name
is categorized to belong to the same gender by all of the threecheckers. Human subjects provide the validation set of inter-
sectional attributes with ground truth information (Ghavami
and Peplau 2013). We use this validation set for evaluating
the intersection-related CEAT, IBD and EIBD experiments.
To follow the order of stereotype-congruity, we use Euro-
pean American males as the second target group and use the
attributes associated with their intersectional biases as the
second attribute set in intersection-related CEAT. There are
only three emergent intersectional biases associated with Eu-
ropean American males in the validation set, which doesn’t
provide a sufﬁcient number of stimuli. A small set of stimuli
does not satisfy the requirements for generating statistically
signiﬁcant concept representation and WEATs. Related stim-
uli details are discussed in the dataset and stimuli sections of
the main paper. In addition, if the size of the ﬁrst attribute set
is smaller than that of the attributes of European American
males, we randomly select an equal number of attributes as-
sociated with the intersectional biases of European American
males. WEAT requires equal-sized sets of attributes.
CEAT I1
We use the frequent given names of African American fe-
males and European American males as two target social
groups and use the attributes associated with the intersec-
tional biases of African American females and attributes as-
sociated with the intersectional biases of European American
males as the two attribute groups.
Since ‘assertive’ is associated with both African American
females and European American males, we do not include it
in this test.
•African American females : Aisha, Keisha, Lakisha,
Latisha, Latoya, Malika, Nichelle, Shereen, Tamika, Tan-
isha, Yolanda, Yvette
•European American males : Andrew, Brad, Frank, Geof-
frey, Jack, Jonathan, Josh, Matthew, Neil, Peter, Roger,
Stephen
•Intersectional biases of African American females : ag-
gressive, athletic, bigbutt, conﬁdent, darkskinned, fried-
chicken, ghetto, loud, overweight, promiscuous, unfemi-
nine, unintelligent, unreﬁned
•Intersectional biases of European American males : all-
American, arrogant, attractive, blond, high-status, intel-
ligent, leader, privileged, racist, rich, sexist, successful,
tall
CEAT I2
We use the frequent given names of African American fe-
males and European American males as two target groups.
We use attributes associated with emergent intersectional bi-
ases of African American females and attributes associated
with intersectional biases of European American males as
two attribute groups.
Since ‘assertive’ is associated with emergent intersectional
bias of African American females and intersectional bias of
European American males, we do not include it in this test.
Table 2: CEAT from main paper (C1-C10,I1-I4) with sample size N= 1;000as opposed to the N= 10;000hyper-
parameter in the main paper. We report the CES ( d) and combined p values of all CEAT ( p) in the main paper with sample
sizeN= 1;000. We observe that all of the results are consistent with the CES and p values reported in the main paper
on Table 1. Light, medium, and dark gray shading of combined dvalues (CES) indicates small, medium, and large effect
size, respectively. There are ﬁve tests which are signiﬁcant with sample size N= 10;000but not signiﬁcant with sample size
N= 1;000. However, these have small effect sizes and as a result we don’t expect statistical signiﬁcance. According to our
experiments, the Spearman correlation between WEAT’s effect size and p value is= 0:99. Smaller effect sizes are expected
to have insigniﬁcant p-values. Accordingly, all of the results under N= 1;000are consistent with the main ﬁndings. The notable
yet consistent differences are C10 with Bert, C4 with GPT, C7 with GPT-2, I3 with GPT-2, and I4 with GPT-2. CES varies
minimally with different sample size ( N), but the differences of the results are smaller than 0:1, suggesting the degree of effect
size remains consistent. In edge cases, where statistical signiﬁcance or effect size is close to a signiﬁcance threshold, gradually
increasingN, in increments of N= +500 would provide more reliable results. A_stands for African Americans. E_stands for
European Americans. M_ stands for Mexican Americans. _ Fstands for females. _ Mstands for males.
Test ELMo BERT GPT GPT-2
d p d p d p d p
C1: Flowers/Insects, P/U- Attitude 1.39<10 300.96<10 301.05<10 300.13<10 30
C2: Instruments/Weapons, P/U- Attitude 1.56<10 300.93<10 301.13<10 30-0.28<10 30
C3: EA/AA names, P/U- Attitude 0.48<10 300.45<10 30-0.11<10 30-0.20<10 30
C4: EA/AA names, P/U- Attitude 0.16 <10 300.49<10 300.00 0.70 -0.23<10 30
C5: EA/AA names, P/U- Attitude 0.12 <10 300.04<10 20.05<10 4-0.17<10 30
C6: Males/Female names, Career/Family 1.28<10 300.91<10 300.21<10 300.34<10 30
C7: Math/Arts, Male/Female terms 0.65<10 300.42<10 300.23<10 300.00 0.81
C8: Science/Arts, Male/Female terms 0.32<10 30-0.07<10 40.26<10 30-0.16<10 30
C9: Mental/Physical disease, Temporary/Permanent 0.99<10 300.55<10 300.07<10 20.04 0.04
C10: Young/Old people’s names, P/U- Attitude 0.11 <10 190.00 0.90 0.04 <10 2-0.17<10 30
I1: AF/EM, AF/EM intersectional 1.24<10 300.76<10 300.05<10 30.05 0.06
I2: AF/EM, AF emergent/EM intersectional 1.24<10 300.70<10 30-0.12<10 300.03 0.26
I3: MF/EM, MF/EM intersectional 1.30<10 300.69<10 30-0.08<10 300.36<10 30
I4: MF/EM, MF emergent/EM intersectional 1.52<10 300.87<10 300.14<10 27-0.26<10 30
Unpleasant and pleasant attributes used to measure valence and attitudes towards targets (Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz 1998).
•African American females : Aisha, Keisha, Lakisha,
Latisha, Latoya, Malika, Nichelle, Shereen, Tamika, Tan-
isha, Yolanda, Yvette
•European American males : Andrew, Brad, Frank, Geof-
frey, Jack, Jonathan, Josh, Matthew, Neil, Peter, Roger,
Stephen
•Emergent intersectional biases of African American
females : aggressive, bigbutt, conﬁdent, darkskinned, fried-
chicken, overweight, promiscuous, unfeminine
•Intersectional biases of European American males : ar-
rogant, blond, high-status, intelligent, racist, rich, success-
ful, tall
CEAT I3
We use the frequent given names of Mexican American fe-
males and European American males as the target groups and
the words associated with their intersectional biases as the
attribute groups.
Since ‘attractive’ is associated with intersectional biases
of both Mexican American females and European American
males, we do not include it in this test.
•Mexican American females : Adriana, Alejandra, Alma,Brenda, Carolina, Iliana, Karina, Liset, Maria, Mayra, So-
nia, Yesenia
•European American males : Andrew, Brad, Frank, Geof-
frey, Jack, Jonathan, Josh, Matthew, Neil, Peter, Roger,
Stephen
•Intersectional biases of Mexican American females :
cook, curvy, darkskinned, feisty, hardworker, loud, maids,
promiscuous, sexy, short, uneducated, unintelligent
•Intersectional biases of European American males : all-
American, arrogant, blond, high-status, intelligent, leader,
privileged, racist, rich, sexist, successful, tall
CEAT I4
We use the frequent given names of Mexican American fe-
males and European American males as target groups. We
use words associated with the emergent intersectional biases
of Mexican American females and words associated with the
intersectional biases of European American males as the two
attribute groups.
•Mexican American females : Adriana, Alejandra, Alma,
Brenda, Carolina, Iliana, Karina, Liset, Maria, Mayra, So-
nia, Yesenia
Table 3: CEAT for intersectional groups with sample size N= 1;000.We construct 4 types of new CEAT with all pairwise
combinations of intersectional groups. We use two intersectional groups as two target social groups. We use 1) pleasant/unpleasant
2) career/family 3) math/arts 4) science/arts as two attribute groups. We report the CES dand combined p valuep . Light,
medium, and dark gray shading of combined dvalues (CES) indicates small, medium, and large effect size respectively. A_
stands for African Americans. E_stands for European Americans. M_stands for Mexican Americans. _Fstands for females.
_Mstands for males.
Test ELMo BERT GPT GPT-2
d p d p d p d p
EM/EF, P/U- Attitude -0.49 <10 30-0.33 <10 30-0.01 0.60 -0.53 <10 30
EM/EF, Career/Family 1.15 <10 300.73 <10 300.34 <10 300.41 <10 30
EM/EF, Math/Arts 0.44 <10 300.34 <10 300.13 <10 25-0.41 <10 30
EM/EF, Science/Arts 0.37 <10 30-0.11 <10 300.07 <10 6-0.04 0.02
EM/AM, P/U- Attitude 0.57 <10 300.40 <10 300.04 <10 2-0.34 <10 30
EM/AM, Career/Family 0.32 <10 300.16 <10 30-0.36 <10 300.42 <10 30
EM/AM, Math/Arts -0.28 <10 30-0.04 <10 2-0.05 <10 30-0.45 <10 30
EM/AM, Science/Arts 0.02 0.10 -0.18 <10 300.17 <10 30-0.20 <10 30
EM/AF, P/U- Attitude -0.35 <10 300.10 <10 11-0.12 <10 30-0.60 <10 30
EM/AF, Career/Family 1.10 <10 300.90 <10 300.20 <10 300.62 <10 30
EM/AF, Math/Arts 0.11 <10 190.72 <10 300.14 <10 23-0.62 <10 30
EM/AF, Science/Arts 0.56 <10 300.29 <10 300.24 <10 30-0.19 <10 30
EM/MM, P/U- Attitude -0.15 <10 300.42 <10 30-0.17 <10 30-0.20 <10 30
EM/MM, Career/Family 0.01 0.46 0.28 <10 30-0.32 <10 300.33 <10 30
EM/MM, Math/Arts 0.06 <10 5-0.22 <10 300.45 <10 30-0.38 <10 30
EM/MM, Science/Arts 0.21 <10 30-0.27 <10 300.62 <10 30-0.37 <10 30
EM/MF, P/U- Attitude -0.82 <10 30-0.19 <10 30-0.34 <10 30-0.60 <10 30
EM/MF, Career/Family 1.14 <10 300.68 <10 300.09 <10 110.68 <10 30
EM/MF,Math/Arts 0.69 <10 300.27 <10 300.28 <10 30-0.78 <10 30
EM/MF, Science/Arts 0.33 <10 300.11 <10 130.41 <10 30-0.29 <10 30
EF/AM, P/U- Attitude 0.95 <10 300.70 <10 300.06 <10 50.09 <10 17
EF/AM, Career/Family -0.98 <10 30-0.62 <10 30-0.63 <10 300.11 <10 21
EF/AM, Math/Arts -0.66 <10 30-0.41 <10 30-0.15 <10 30-0.10 <10 30
EF/AM, Science/Arts -0.30 <10 30-0.08 <10 300.11 <10 13-0.19 <10 30
EF/AF, P/U- Attitude 0.09 <10 220.50 <10 30-0.15 <10 30-0.20 <10 30
EF/AF, Career/Family 0.04 <10 70.22 <10 30-0.16 <10 300.33 <10 30
EF/AF, Math/Arts -0.33 <10 300.39 <10 30-0.01 0.44 -0.35 <10 30
EF/AF, Science/Arts 0.23 <10 300.43 <10 300.18 <10 30-0.20 <10 30
EF/MM, P/U- Attitude 0.38 <10 300.70 <10 30-0.19 <10 300.32 <10 30
EF/MM, Career/Family -1.10 <10 30-0.45 <10 30-0.65 <10 30-0.02 0.14
EF/MM, Math/Arts -0.34 <10 30-0.55 <10 300.37 <10 30-0.02 0.28
EF/MM, Science/Arts -0.18 <10 30-0.21 <10 300.54 <10 30-0.36 <10 30
EF/MF, P/U- Attitude -0.42 <10 300.19 <10 30-0.33 <10 30-0.15 <10 30
EF/MF, Career/Family -0.09 <10 30-0.07 <10 30-0.23 <10 300.43 <10 30
EF/MF, Math/Arts 0.30 <10 30-0.05 <10 300.17 <10 30-0.55 <10 30
EF/MF, Science/Arts -0.01 0.40 0.25 <10 300.37 <10 30-0.30 <10 30
AM/AF, P/U- Attitude -0.79 <10 30-0.32 <10 30-0.19 <10 30-0.24 <10 30
AM/AF, Career/Family 0.94 <10 300.84 <10 300.50 <10 300.17 <10 30
AM/AF, Math/Arts 0.34 <10 300.79 <10 300.16 <10 30-0.17 <10 30
AM/AF, Science/Arts 0.50 <10 300.47 <10 300.07 <10 7-0.02 0.15
AM/MM, P/U- Attitude -0.72 <10 300.02 0.10 -0.20 <10 300.20 <10 30
AM/MM, Career/Family -0.28 <10 300.16 <10 300.07 <10 7-0.12 <10 30
AM/MM, Math/Arts 0.33 <10 30-0.16 <10 300.51 <10 300.08 <10 9
AM/MM, Science/Arts 0.13 <10 30-0.13 <10 300.45 <10 30-0.16 <10 30
AM/MF, P/U- Attitude -1.15 <10 30-0.57 <10 30-0.38 <10 30-0.22 <10 30
AM/MF, Career/Family 0.96 <10 300.56 <10 300.41 <10 300.27 <10 30
AM/MF, Math/Arts 0.87 <10 300.36 <10 300.31 <10 30-0.38 <10 30
AM/MF, Science/Arts 0.30 <10 300.30 <10 300.27 <10 30-0.14 <10 30
AF/MM, P/U- Attitude 0.26 <10 300.33 <10 30-0.04 <10 300.46 <10 30
AF/MM, Career/Family -1.07 <10 30-0.64 <10 30-0.54 <10 30-0.31 <10 30
AF/MM, Math/Arts -0.03 0.03 -0.90 <10 300.37 <10 300.29 <10 30
AF/MM, Science/Arts -0.38 <10 30-0.56 <10 300.43 <10 30-0.18 <10 30
AF/MF, P/U- Attitude -0.43 <10 30-0.33 <10 30-0.19 <10 30-0.01 0.48
AF/MF, Career/Family -0.15 <10 30-0.31 <10 30-0.06 <10 300.15 <10 30
AF/MF, Math/Arts 0.59 <10 30-0.42 <10 300.16 <10 30-0.25 <10 30
AF/MF, Science/Arts -0.20 <10 30-0.18 <10 300.22 <10 30-0.15 <10 30
MM/MF, P/U- Attitude -0.77 <10 30-0.59 <10 30-0.15 <10 30-0.44 <10 30
MM/MF, Career/Family 1.11 <10 300.40 <10 300.44 <10 300.42 <10 30
MM/MF, Math/Arts 0.62 <10 300.50 <10 30-0.18 <10 30-0.49 <10 30
MM/MF, Science/Arts 0.18 <10 300.41 <10 30-0.19 <10 300.02 0.18
Unpleasant and pleasant attributes used to measure valence and attitudes
towards targets from Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz (1998).
Table 4: CEAT for intersectional groups with sample size N= 1;000.We construct 4 types of new CEAT with all pairwise
combinations of intersectional groups. We use two intersectional groups as two target social groups. We use 1) pleasant/unpleasant
2) career/family 3) math/arts 4) science/arts as two attribute groups. Each one of the four experiments with the neural language
models is conducted using the same sample of sentences. We report the CES dand combined p valuep . Light, medium,
and dark gray shading of combined dvalues (CES) indicates small, medium, and large effect size respectively. A_stands for
African Americans. E_stands for European Americans. M_stands for Mexican Americans. _Fstands for females. _Mstands
for males.
Test ELMo BERT GPT GPT-2
d p d p d p d p
EM/EF, P/U- Attitude -0.62 <10 30-0.17 <10 30-0.11 <10 30-0.28 <10 30
EM/EF, Career/Family 1.07 <10 300.40 <10 300.27 <10 300.33 <10 30
EM/EF, Math/Arts 0.07 <10 300.12 <10 300.23 <10 30-0.22 <10 30
EM/EF, Science/Arts 0.21 <10 30-0.04 <10 300.12 <10 300.01 <10 2
EM/AM, P/U - Attitude 0.50 <10 300.37 <10 300.13 <10 30-0.15 <10 30
EM/AM, Career/Family 0.19 <10 300.10 <10 30-0.35 <10 300.30 <10 30
EM/AM, Math/Arts -0.47 <10 30-0.18 <10 300.13 <10 30-0.30 <10 30
EM/AM, Science/Arts -0.11 <10 30-0.03 <10 140.14 <10 30-0.20 <10 30
EM/AF, P/U - Attitude -0.24 <10 300.32 <10 30-0.26 <10 30-0.26 <10 30
EM/AF, Career/Family 1.12 <10 300.40 <10 300.23 <10 300.66 <10 30
EM/AF, Math/Arts 0.07 <10 300.30 <10 300.28 <10 30-0.52 <10 30
EM/AF, Science/Arts 0.55 <10 300.47 <10 300.21 <10 30-0.35 <10 30
EM/MM, P/U - Attitude -0.18 <10 300.37 <10 30-0.36 <10 30-0.12 <10 30
EM/MM, Career/Family -0.08 <10 300.04 <10 21-0.26 <10 300.23 <10 30
EM/MM, Math/Arts -0.08 <10 30-0.22 <10 300.54 <10 30-0.47 <10 30
EM/MM, Science/Arts 0.16 <10 30-0.09 <10 300.56 <10 30-0.45 <10 30
EM/MF, P/U - Attitude -0.73 <10 300.09 <10 30-0.24 <10 30-0.24 <10 30
EM/MF, Career/Family 1.06 <10 300.35 <10 300.06 <10 300.66 <10 30
EM/MF,Math/Arts 0.58 <10 300.09 <10 300.49 <10 30-0.61 <10 30
EM/MF, Science/Arts 0.24 <10 300.26 <10 300.48 <10 30-0.43 <10 30
EF/AM, P/U - Attitude 0.96 <10 300.51 <10 300.24 <10 300.12 <10 30
EF/AM, Career/Family -1.00 <10 30-0.31 <10 30-0.57 <10 300.00 0:86
EF/AM, Math/Arts -0.53 <10 30-0.30 <10 30-0.10 <10 30-0.13 <10 30
EF/AM, Science/Arts -0.28 <10 300.00 0:42 0.03 <10 13-0.24 <10 30
EF/AF, P/U - Attitude 0.27 <10 300.47 <10 30-0.17 <10 300.01 0:27
EF/AF, Career/Family 0.13 <10 300.01 0:037 -0.05 <10 300.45 <10 30
EF/AF, Math/Arts 0.00 0:85 0.19 <10 300.06 <10 30-0.40 <10 30
EF/AF, Science/Arts 0.34 <10 300.50 <10 300.11 <10 30-0.44 <10 30
EF/MM, P/U - Attitude 0.47 <10 300.52 <10 30-0.25 <10 300.17 <10 30
EF/MM, Career/Family -1.10 <10 30-0.35 <10 30-0.50 <10 30-0.09 <10 30
EF/MM, Math/Arts -0.15 <10 30-0.34 <10 300.37 <10 30-0.26 <10 30
EF/MM, Science/Arts -0.05 <10 30-0.06 <10 300.47 <10 30-0.51 <10 30
EF/MF, P/U - Attitude -0.18 <10 300.26 <10 30-0.14 <10 300.02 <10 2
EF/MF, Career/Family -0.13 <10 30-0.05 <10 30-0.19 <10 300.46 <10 30
EF/MF, Math/Arts 0.52 <10 30-0.03 <10 120.32 <10 30-0.52 <10 30
EF/MF, Science/Arts 0.04 <10 300.30 <10 300.38 <10 30-0.52 <10 30
AM/AF, P/U - Attitude -0.63 <10 30-0.06 <10 30-0.39 <10 30-0.11 <10 30
AM/AF, Career/Family 1.05 <10 300.32 <10 300.53 <10 300.41 <10 30
AM/AF, Math/Arts 0.49 <10 300.48 <10 300.16 <10 30-0.24 <10 30
AM/AF, Science/Arts 0.57 <10 300.52 <10 300.08 <10 30-0.18 <10 30
AM/MM, P/U - Attitude -0.67 <10 30-0.02 <10 3-0.48 <10 300.04 <10 21
AM/MM, Career/Family -0.27 <10 30-0.06 <10 300.13 <10 30-0.08 <10 30
AM/MM, Math/Arts 0.38 <10 30-0.04 <10 300.45 <10 30-0.15 <10 30
AM/MM, Science/Arts 0.24 <10 30-0.06 <10 300.44 <10 30-0.27 <10 30
AM/MF, P/U - Attitude -1.03 <10 30-0.28 <10 30-0.37 <10 30-0.09 <10 30
AM/MF, Career/Family 0.98 <10 300.25 <10 300.38 <10 300.42 <10 30
AM/MF, Math/Arts 0.91 <10 300.26 <10 300.39 <10 30-0.37 <10 30
AM/MF, Science/Arts 0.31 <10 300.30 <10 300.34 <10 30-0.28 <10 30
AF/MM, P/U - Attitude 0.09 <10 300.04 <10 11-0.09 <10 300.16 <10 30
AF/MM, Career/Family -1.15 <10 30-0.36 <10 30-0.47 <10 30-0.47 <10 30
AF/MM, Math/Arts -0.14 <10 30-0.52 <10 300.31 <10 300.11 <10 30
AF/MM, Science/Arts -0.39 <10 30-0.56 <10 300.35 <10 30-0.10 <10 30
AF/MF, P/U - Attitude -0.41 <10 30-0.23 <10 300.02 <10 80.02 <10 3
AF/MF, Career/Family -0.27 <10 30-0.05 <10 30-0.15 <10 300.06 <10 30
AF/MF, Math/Arts 0.48 <10 30-0.22 <10 300.26 <10 30-0.17 <10 30
AF/MF, Science/Arts -0.29 <10 30-0.21 <10 300.26 <10 30-0.13 <10 30
MM/MF, P/U - Attitude -0.62 <10 30-0.27 <10 300.11 <10 30-0.15 <10 30
MM/MF, Career/Family 1.11 <10 300.31 <10 300.30 <10 300.49 <10 30
MM/MF, Math/Arts 0.63 <10 300.30 <10 30-0.04 <10 30-0.25 <10 30
MM/MF, Science/Arts 0.09 <10 300.35 <10 30-0.08 <10 30-0.04 <10 14
Unpleasant and pleasant attributes used to measure valence and attitudes
towards targets from Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz (1998).
•European American males : Andrew, Brad, Frank, Geof-
frey, Jack, Jonathan, Josh, Matthew, Neil, Peter, Roger,
Stephen
•Emergent intersectional biases of Mexican American
females : cook, curvy, feisty, maids, promiscuous, sexy
•Intersectional biases of European American males : ar-
rogant, assertive, intelligent, rich, successful, tall
IBD and EIBD
We detect the attributes associated with the intersectional
biases and emergent intersectional biases of African Ameri-
can females and Mexican American females in GloVe SWE.
We assume that there are three subcategories under the race
category (African American, Mexican American, European
American) and two subcategories under the gender category
(female, male). We use the frequent given names to represent
each intersectional group. Again, we note that, in future work
we’d generalize this work to nsubcategories under each cate-
gory. Further, in future work, instead of categorizing people
into social groups, we’d like to explore representing individ-
uals in social data with continuous real-valued variables as
opposed to associating them with category labels.
•African American females : Aisha, Keisha, Lakisha,
Latisha, Latoya, Malika, Nichelle, Shereen, Tamika, Tan-
isha, Yolanda, Yvette
•African American males : Alonzo, Alphonse, Hakim, Ja-
mal, Jamel, Jerome, Leroy, Lionel, Marcellus, Terrence,
Tyrone, Wardell
•European American females : Carrie, Colleen, Ellen,
Emily, Heather, Katie, Megan, Melanie, Nancy, Rachel,
Sarah,
Stephanie
•European American males : Andrew, Brad, Frank, Geof-
frey, Jack, Jonathan, Josh, Matthew, Neil, Peter, Roger,
Stephen
•Mexican American females : Adriana, Alejandra, Alma,
Brenda, Carolina, Iliana, Karina, Liset, Maria, Mayra, So-
nia, Yesenia
•Mexican American males : Alberto, Alejandro, Alfredo,
Antonio, César, Jesús, José, Juan, Miguel, Pedro, Rigob-
erto, Rogelio
We list all the attributes used in validation experiments.
These are stimuli associated with different social groups and
a set of random words that are not expected to be associated
with social groups. These random attributes are borrowed
from the insect target category of the ‘universally accepted
stereotypes’ IAT, which is a baseline WEAT. We use 98 words
in total in the validation experiments.
We also list the probability of random chance of correct
classiﬁcation in parentheses next to each social group. The
goal here is to present the success rate of the machine learn-
ing detection method in a meaningful way. To calculate the
probability of random chance of correct classiﬁcation, we
treat the detection task as if this were a one-vs-all veriﬁcation
task, which is one type of a classiﬁcation task, that aims toverify the membership of a data point in the main class. All
the other data points from the open world, that don’t belong
to the main class we are testing for, can belong to any other
class. However, in reality, our detection method is a semi-
supervised non-parametric prediction method which relies on
the threshold t. Some of the attributes of some social groups
overlap. For example, ‘assertive’ is associated with emergent
intersectional biases of African American females and also
associated with emergent intersectional biases of European
American males. As a result, the sum of all random chances
of different groups is not 100%.
•Biases of Females : attractive, caring, dependent, emo-
tional, feminine, jealous, manipulative, materialistic, moth-
erly, petite, soft, submissive, talkative (random chance of
correct classiﬁcation: 13.3%)
•Biases of Males : aggressive, ambitious, arrogant, ﬁxer-
upper, high-status, intelligent, leader, messy, provider, re-
spected, sexist, tall, unfaithful (random chance of correct
classiﬁcation: 13.3%)
•Biases of African Americans : athletic, criminals, danger-
ous, gangsters, ghetto, lazy, loud, poor, tall, uneducated,
unreﬁned, violent (random chance of correct classiﬁcation:
12.2%)
•Emergent Intersectional Biases of African American
Females : aggressive, assertive, bigbutt, conﬁdent,
darkskinned, fried-chicken, overweight, promiscuous, un-
feminine (random chance of correct classiﬁcation: 9.2%)
•Intersectional Biases of African American Females : ag-
gressive, assertive, athletic, bigbutt, conﬁdent, darkskinned,
fried-chicken, ghetto, loud, overweight, promiscuous, un-
feminine, unintelligent, unreﬁned (random chance of cor-
rect classiﬁcation: 14.3%)
•Emergent Intersectional Biases of African American
Males : darkskinned, hypersexual, rapper (random chance
of correct classiﬁcation: 3.1%)
•Intersectional Biases of African American Males : ath-
letic, criminals, dangerous, darkskinned, gangsters, hyper-
sexual, lazy, loud, poor, rapper, tall, unintelligent, violent
(random chance of correct classiﬁcation: 13.3%)
•Biases of European Americans : all-American, arrogant,
attractive, blond, blue-eyes, high-status, ignorant, intelli-
gent, overweight, patronizing, privileged, racist, red-neck,
rich, tall (random chance of correct classiﬁcation: 15.3%)
•Emergent Intersectional Biases of European Ameri-
can Females : ditsy (random chance of correct classiﬁ-
cation: 1.0%)
•Intersectional Biases of European American Females :
arrogant, attractive, blond, ditsy, emotional, feminine, high-
status, intelligent, materialistic, petite, racist, rich, submis-
sive, tall (random chance of correct classiﬁcation: 14.3%)
•Emergent Intersectional Biases of European Ameri-
can Males : assertive, educated, successful (random chance
of correct classiﬁcation: 3.1%)
•Intersectional Biases of European American Males : all-
American, arrogant, assertive, attractive, blond, educated,
high-status, intelligent, leader, privileged, racist, rich, sex-
ist, successful, tall (random chance of correct classiﬁcation:
15.3%)
•Biases of Mexican Americans : darkskinned, day-laborer,
family-oriented, gangster, hardworker, illegal-immigrant,
lazy, loud, macho, overweight, poor, short, uneducated,
unintelligent (random chance of correct classiﬁcation:
14.3%)
•Emergent Intersectional Biases of Mexican American
Females : cook, curvy, feisty, maids, promiscuous, sexy
(random chance of correct classiﬁcation: 6.1%)
•Intersectional Biases of Mexican American Females :
attractive, cook, curvy, darkskinned, feisty, hardworker,
loud, maids, promiscuous, sexy, short, uneducated, unin-
telligent (random chance of correct classiﬁcation: 13.3%)
•Emergent Intersectional Biases of Mexican American
Males : drunks, jealous, promiscuous, violent (random
chance of correct classiﬁcation: 4.1%)
•Intersectional Biases of Mexican American Males : ag-
gressive, arrogant, darkskinned, day-laborer, drunks, hard-
worker, illegal-immigrant, jealous, macho, poor, promis-
cuous, short, uneducated, unintelligent, violent (random
chance of correct classiﬁcation: 15.3%)
•Random (Insects) : ant, bedbug, bee, beetle, blackﬂy,
caterpillar, centipede, cockroach, cricket, dragonﬂy, ﬂea,
ﬂy, gnat, hornet, horseﬂy, locust, maggot, mosquito, moth,
roach, spider, tarantula, termite, wasp, weevil (random
chance of correct classiﬁcation: 25.5%)
Open Source Code, Data, and Documentation
https://github.com/weiguowilliam/CEAT is the link to our
open source git repository. Code and links to datasets are
available in the project repository. In addition, answers to
frequently asked questions about the details of extracting
the contextualized word embeddings are documented. The
extracted embeddings for the stimuli take up approximately
50GBmemory.References
Arrington-Sanders, R.; Oidtman, J.; Morgan, A.; Harper, G.;
Trent, M.; and Fortenberry, J. D. 2015. 13. Intersecting
Identities in Black Gay and Bisexual Young Men: A Potential
Framework for HIV Risk. Journal of Adolescent Health
56(2): S7–S8.
Aßenmacher, M.; and Heumann, C. 2020. On the com-
parability of pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.00781 .
Bender, E. M.; Gebru, T.; McMillan-Major, A.; and
Shmitchell, S. 2021. On the dangers of stochastic parrots:
Can language models be too big. Proceedings of FAccT .
Blodgett, S. L.; Barocas, S.; Daumé III, H.; and Wallach, H.
2020. Language (Technology) is Power: A Critical Survey
of" Bias" in NLP. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14050 .
Bohnet, B.; McDonald, R.; Simoes, G.; Andor, D.; Pitler,
E.; and Maynez, J. 2018. Morphosyntactic tagging with a
meta-bilstm model over context sensitive token encodings.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.08237 .
Bolukbasi, T.; Chang, K.-W.; Zou, J. Y .; Saligrama, V .; and
Kalai, A. T. 2016. Man is to computer programmer as woman
is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , 4349–4357.
Borenstein, M.; Hedges, L.; and Rothstein, H. ???? Meta-
analysis: Fixed effect vs. random effects .
Brown, T. B.; Mann, B.; Ryder, N.; Subbiah, M.; Kaplan, J.;
Dhariwal, P.; Neelakantan, A.; Shyam, P.; Sastry, G.; Askell,
A.; et al. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 .
Buolamwini, J.; and Gebru, T. 2018. Gender shades: In-
tersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender clas-
siﬁcation. In Conference on fairness, accountability and
transparency , 77–91.
Cabrera, A. A.; Kahng, M.; Hohman, F.; Morgenstern, J.; and
Chau, D. H. ???? DISCOVERY OF INTERSECTIONAL
BIAS IN MACHINE LEARNING USING AUTOMATIC
SUBGROUP GENERATION .
Caliskan, A.; Bryson, J. J.; and Narayanan, A. 2017. Se-
mantics derived automatically from language corpora contain
human-like biases. Science 356(6334): 183–186.
Campolo, A.; Sanﬁlippo, M.; Whittaker, M.; and Crawford,
K. 2017. AI now 2017 report. AI Now Institute at New York
University .
Chelba, C.; Mikolov, T.; Schuster, M.; Ge, Q.; Brants, T.;
Koehn, P.; and Robinson, T. 2013. One billion word bench-
mark for measuring progress in statistical language modeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.3005 .
Crenshaw, K. 1989. Demarginalizing the intersection of
race and sex: A black feminist critique of antidiscrimination
doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics. u. Chi. Legal
f.139.
De-Arteaga, M.; Romanov, A.; Wallach, H.; Chayes, J.;
Borgs, C.; Chouldechova, A.; Geyik, S.; Kenthapadi, K.; and
Kalai, A. T. 2019. Bias in bios: A case study of semantic rep-
resentation bias in a high-stakes setting. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,
120–128.
DerSimonian, R.; and Kacker, R. 2007. Random-effects
model for meta-analysis of clinical trials: an update. Contem-
porary clinical trials 28(2): 105–114.
DerSimonian, R.; and Laird, N. 1986. Meta-analysis in clini-
cal trials. Controlled clinical trials 7(3): 177–188.
Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; and Toutanova, K. 2018.
Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-
guage understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .
Edunov, S.; Ott, M.; Auli, M.; and Grangier, D. 2018.
Understanding back-translation at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.09381 .
Ethayarajh, K. 2019. How contextual are contextualized word
representations? comparing the geometry of BERT, ELMo,
and GPT-2 embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.00512 .
Ethayarajh, K.; Duvenaud, D.; and Hirst, G. 2019. Under-
standing Undesirable Word Embedding Associations. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 1696–1705.
Firth, J. R. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic theory, 1930-1955.
Studies in linguistic analysis .
Floridi, L.; and Chiriatti, M. 2020. GPT-3: Its nature, scope,
limits, and consequences. Minds and Machines 30(4): 681–
694.
Garg, N.; Schiebinger, L.; Jurafsky, D.; and Zou, J. 2018.
Word embeddings quantify 100 years of gender and ethnic
stereotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 115(16): E3635–E3644.
Ghavami, N.; and Peplau, L. A. 2013. An intersectional analy-
sis of gender and ethnic stereotypes: Testing three hypotheses.
Psychology of Women Quarterly 37(1): 113–127.
Gonen, H.; and Goldberg, Y . 2019. Lipstick on a pig:
Debiasing methods cover up systematic gender biases in
word embeddings but do not remove them. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.03862 .
Greenwald, A. G.; and Banaji, M. R. 1995. Implicit social
cognition: attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psycholog-
ical review 102(1): 4.
Greenwald, A. G.; McGhee, D. E.; and Schwartz, J. L. 1998.
Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: the
implicit association test. Journal of personality and social
psychology 74(6): 1464.
Greenwald, A. G.; Nosek, B. A.; and Banaji, M. R. 2003.
Understanding and using the implicit association test: I. An
improved scoring algorithm. Journal of personality and
social psychology 85(2): 197.
Hancock, A.-M. 2007. When multiplication doesn’t equal
quick addition: Examining intersectionality as a research
paradigm. Perspectives on politics 5(1): 63–79.Hare-Mustin, R. T.; and Marecek, J. 1988. The meaning of
difference: Gender theory, postmodernism, and psychology.
American psychologist 43(6): 455.
Harris, Z. S. 1954. Distributional structure. Word 10(2-3):
146–162.
Hatzivassiloglou, V .; and McKeown, K. 1997. Predicting
the semantic orientation of adjectives. In 35th annual meet-
ing of the association for computational linguistics and 8th
conference of the european chapter of the association for
computational linguistics , 174–181.
Hedges, L. V . 1983. A random effects model for effect sizes.
Psychological Bulletin 93(2): 388.
Hedges, L. V .; and Olkin, I. 2014. Statistical methods for
meta-analysis . Academic press.
Hedges, L. V .; and Vevea, J. L. 1998. Fixed-and random-
effects models in meta-analysis. Psychological methods 3(4):
486.
Hochreiter, S.; and Schmidhuber, J. 1997. Long short-term
memory. Neural computation 9(8): 1735–1780.
Huang, M.; Naser-Tavakolian, K.; Clifton, M.; Franceschi,
A. M.; Kim, D.; Zhang, J. Z.; and Schweitzer, M. 2019. Gen-
der Differences in Article Citations by Authors from Ameri-
can Institutions in Major Radiology Journals. Cureus 11(8).
Hurtado, A.; and Sinha, M. 2008. More than men: Latino
feminist masculinities and intersectionality. Sex Roles 59(5-
6): 337–349.
Hutchinson, B.; Prabhakaran, V .; Denton, E.; Webster, K.;
Zhong, Y .; and Denuyl, S. 2020. Social Biases in NLP Mod-
els as Barriers for Persons with Disabilities. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , 5491–5501.
Kahn, A. S.; and Yoder, J. D. 1989. The psychology of
women and conservatism: Rediscovering social change. Psy-
chology of Women Quarterly 13(4): 417–432.
Kurita, K.; Vyas, N.; Pareek, A.; Black, A. W.; and Tsvetkov,
Y . 2019. Quantifying Social Biases in Contextual Word
Representations. In 1st ACL Workshop on Gender Bias for
Natural Language Processing .
Landis, F.; Lewontin, R.; Desnoyers, L.; Mergler, D.; and
Weston, A. 1982. CIA psychological warfare operations.
Case Studies in Chile, Jamaica and Nicaragua. Science for
the People (14): 6–11.
May, C.; Wang, A.; Bordia, S.; Bowman, S. R.; and Rudinger,
R. 2019. On measuring social biases in sentence encoders.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10561 .
Mikolov, T.; Sutskever, I.; Chen, K.; Corrado, G. S.; and
Dean, J. 2013. Distributed representations of words and
phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , 3111–3119.
Montgomery, D. C.; and Runger, G. C. 2010. Applied statis-
tics and probability for engineers . John Wiley & Sons.
Nadeem, M.; Bethke, A.; and Reddy, S. 2020. StereoSet:
Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09456 .
Nosek, B. A.; Banaji, M. R.; and Greenwald, A. G. 2002.
Harvesting implicit group attitudes and beliefs from a demon-
stration web site. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and
Practice 6(1): 101.
Osgood, C. E. 1964. Semantic differential technique in the
comparative study of cultures. American Anthropologist
66(3): 171–200.
Parada, M. 2016. Ethnolinguistic and gender aspects of
Latino naming in Chicago: Exploring regional variation.
Names 64(1): 19–35.
Pennington, J.; Socher, R.; and Manning, C. D. 2014. Glove:
Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the
2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing (EMNLP) , 1532–1543.
Peters, M. E.; Neumann, M.; Iyyer, M.; Gardner, M.; Clark,
C.; Lee, K.; and Zettlemoyer, L. 2018. Deep contextualized
word representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365 .
Radford, A.; Narasimhan, K.; Salimans, T.; and Sutskever, I.
2018. Improving language understanding by generative pre-
training. URL https://s3-us-west-2. amazonaws. com/openai-
assets/researchcovers/languageunsupervised/language un-
derstanding paper. pdf .
Radford, A.; Wu, J.; Child, R.; Luan, D.; Amodei, D.; and
Sutskever, I. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multi-
task learners. OpenAI Blog 1(8): 9.
Raghavan, M.; and Barocas, S. ???? Challenges for miti-
gating bias in algorithmic hiring. 2019. URL https://www.
brookings. edu/research/challenges-for-mitigating-bias-in-
algorithmic-hiring .
Rice, M. E.; and Harris, G. T. 2005. Comparing effect sizes
in follow-up studies: ROC Area, Cohen’s d, and r. Law and
human behavior 29(5): 615–620.
Riloff, E.; and Wiebe, J. 2003. Learning extraction patterns
for subjective expressions. In Proceedings of the 2003 confer-
ence on Empirical methods in natural language processing ,
105–112.
Rosenthal, R.; and DiMatteo, M. R. 2002. Metaanalysis.
Stevens’ handbook of experimental psychology .
Strubell, E.; Ganesh, A.; and McCallum, A. 2019. Energy
and policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.02243 .
Swinger, N.; De-Arteaga, M.; Heffernan IV , N. T.; Leiserson,
M. D.; and Kalai, A. T. 2019. What are the biases in my
word embedding? In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM
Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , 305–311.
Tan, Y . C.; and Celis, L. E. 2019. Assessing social and inter-
sectional biases in contextualized word representations. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 13209–
13220.
Tenney, I.; Xia, P.; Chen, B.; Wang, A.; Poliak, A.; McCoy,
R. T.; Kim, N.; Van Durme, B.; Bowman, S. R.; Das, D.;
et al. 2019. What do you learn from context? probing for
sentence structure in contextualized word representations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06316 .Thomas, V . G.; and Miles, S. E. 1995. Psychology of Black
women: Past, present, and future. .
Toney, A.; and Caliskan, A. 2020. ValNorm: A New Word
Embedding Intrinsic Evaluation Method Reveals Valence
Biases are Consistent Across Languages and Over Decades.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03950 .
Toney, A.; Pandey, A.; Guo, W.; Broniatowski, D.; and
Caliskan, A. 2020. Pro-Russian Biases in Anti-Chinese
Tweets about the Novel Coronavirus. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.08726 .
Turney, P. D.; and Littman, M. L. 2003. Measuring praise and
criticism: Inference of semantic orientation from association.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 21(4):
315–346.
Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.;
Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser, Ł.; and Polosukhin, I. 2017. Attention
is all you need. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , 5998–6008.
V oigt, R.; Jurgens, D.; Prabhakaran, V .; Jurafsky, D.; and
Tsvetkov, Y . 2018. RtGender: A corpus for studying differ-
ential responses to gender. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC 2018) .
Yang, Z.; Dai, Z.; Yang, Y .; Carbonell, J.; Salakhutdinov,
R. R.; and Le, Q. V . 2019. Xlnet: Generalized autoregres-
sive pretraining for language understanding. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , 5754–5764.
Zhao, J.; Wang, T.; Yatskar, M.; Cotterell, R.; Ordonez, V .;
and Chang, K.-W. 2019. Gender bias in contextualized word
embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03310 .
Zhao, J.; Zhou, Y .; Li, Z.; Wang, W.; and Chang, K.-W. 2018.
Learning gender-neutral word embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.01496 .
Zhu, Y .; Kiros, R.; Zemel, R.; Salakhutdinov, R.; Urtasun, R.;
Torralba, A.; and Fidler, S. 2015. Aligning books and movies:
Towards story-like visual explanations by watching movies
and reading books. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , 19–27.