Title: Towards Zero-Label Language Learning

Towards Zero-Label Language Learning
Zirui Wang Adams Wei Yu Orhan Firat Yuan Cao
Google AI
{ziruiw,adamsyuwei,orhanf,yuancao}@google.com
Abstract
This paper explores zero-label learning in Nat-
ural Language Processing (NLP), whereby no
human-annotated data is used anywhere dur-
ing training and models are trained purely on
synthetic data. At the core of our framework
is a novel approach for better leveraging the
powerful pretrained language models. Specif-
ically, inspired by the recent success of few-
shot inference on GPT-3, we present a training
data creation procedure named Unsupervised
Data Generation (UDG), which leverages few-
shot prompts to synthesize high-quality train-
ing data without real human annotations. Our
method enables zero-label learning as we train
task-speciﬁc models solely on the synthetic
data, yet we achieve better or comparable
results from strong baseline models trained
on human-labeled data. Furthermore, when
mixed with labeled data, our approach serves
as a highly effective data augmentation proce-
dure, achieving new state-of-the-art results on
the SuperGLUE benchmark1.
1 Introduction
It is well-known that deep learning models are data-
hungry. In natural language processing, language
model pre-training has become a successful trans-
fer learning approach to effectively reduce the re-
quirement for task-speciﬁc labeled data (Devlin
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Rad-
ford et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020). Via training on unsupervised large-scale
text corpus, bi-directional language models such as
BERT and XLNet are able to learn contextualized
text representations that can then be ﬁne-tuned on
downstream tasks with small training data sizes,
which have pushed the state of the art on a variety
of natural language understanding benchmarks.
More recently, gigantic language models (GLM)
such as GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) have been
1Notably, our method is also the ﬁrst to surpass human
performance as of Dec 20, 2020.Model Setting SuperGLUE Avg.
Human 89.8
Previous SOTASupervised89.3
T5+UDG 90.4
GPT3 Few-Shot 71.8
UDG Unsupervised 78.1
Table 1: SuperGLUE summary.
shown to be effective few-shot learners . As un-
supervised training corpus and model size scaling
up, the model is able to generate answers for an
unseen NLP task with few-shot inference, based
on a manually crafted input prompt consist of a
task description and a few examples. Despite no
ﬁne-tuning is involved, the language model per-
forms competitively against ﬁne-tuned baselines
on a wide range of tasks, whose success suggests a
new paradigm of transfer learning in NLP. Yet the
gaps between few-shot inference and state-of-the-
art ﬁne-tuned methods are still large on many tasks
(for example 17.5 below prior state-of-the-art on
SuperGLUE as shown in Table 1), urging for ex-
ploration of applications of giant language models
beyond few-shot inference.
Inspired by the few-shot capability of GPT3, we
shift our focus towards utilizing GLMs for example
creation instead of direct inference, and ﬁnd that
language models are also excellent few-shot gener-
ators . Similar to the few-shot inference paradigm,
we query the model with a prompt with a few exam-
ples and a description of the desired label, and the
model generates examples aligned with the label
while resembling the given samples. Interestingly,
we ﬁnd no supervision is required for high-quality
data creation and thus we only need to use unla-
beled examples in our prompts. The dataset cre-
ated by the model can then used to ﬁne-tune any
off-the-shelf model. This approach can therefore
be treated as a zero-label learning procedure, in
which no human label is required throughout the
whole process. It differs from the unsupervisedarXiv:2109.09193v1  [cs.CL]  19 Sep 2021
Figure 1: Illustration of the UDG framework.
learning procedure in that the downstream models
still need to be trained with synthetic data , however
the training example creation requires no human
labor.
Following this procedure, we are able to estab-
lish a system trained using unlabeled training data
only, and thus we refer to it as Unsupervised Data
Generation (UDG ). Experiments show that our
unsupervised system performs competitively with
strong supervised baselines and achieves new state-
of-the-art few-shot learning results on text classiﬁ-
cation and the SuperGLUE language understanding
benchmarks. The synthesized data can further be
used for data augmentation purpose. When com-
bined with existing labeled data we are able to
achieve the ﬁrst super-human SuperGLUE scores.
These results suggest that few-shot training data
creation is a promising alternative to few-shot in-
ference with powerful language models.
2 Related Work
Data augmentation has traditionally been a popular
technique for NLP model quality improvement, es-
pecially in low-resource regimes (Yu et al., 2018;
Wei and Zou, 2019) While traditionally simple
heuristics like token-level modiﬁcation has been
applied to diversify training samples, more recently
generative data augmentation has gained popular-
ity due to the progress made in language modeling
(Anaby-Tavor et al., 2019; Papanikolaou and Pier-
leoni, 2020; Juuti et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021;
Kumar et al., 2021). However, they often require
labeled examples to ﬁnetune generative models
and heavy postprocessing for data cleaning. On the
other hand, our method generates data in a fully
unsupervised manner without ﬁnetuning the lan-guage model, showcasing a new zero-label learning
paradigm.
Our approach is also closely related to knowl-
edge retrieval from large language models. These
models are known to be good at memorizing facts
from training data and capable of performing as
open knowledge bases (Petroni et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2020; Carlini et al.,
2021). The high quality of training examples cre-
ated by our approach is to a large part guaranteed
by the model’s strong knowledge retrieval ability,
which reduces the chance of erratic hallucinations
irrelevant to the provided labels.
3 Method
3.1 Background: Few-shot Inference
Given a set of labeled data L=f(xi;yi)gn
i=1for
a speciﬁc downstream task, the most common ap-
proach in recent years has been ﬁne-tuning that
updates the weights of a pre-trained model accord-
ing toL(Devlin et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019;
Raffel et al., 2019). While obtaining state-of-the-
art performance on a wide range of tasks, ﬁne-
tuning requires extra update steps and non-trivial
amounts of labeled data in the target task. On the
other hand, few-shot inference is a more resource-
efﬁcient paradigm exhibited in the latest gigantic
language models such as GPT3 (Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020). The idea is to utilize
the language model to infer the correct label based
on the task description and a few sample input-
label pairs. In particular, the input to the model
Mis a handcrafted ordered prompt consisted of
a task description T, a small set of K examples
Lfew=f(xi;yi)gK
i=1L, and the query example
IMDb Yelp-2 Yelp-5 Amazon-2 Amazon-5 DBpedia Avg.
XLNetSupervised96.80 98.63 72.95 97.89 68.33 99.40 89.00
BERT LARGE 95.49 98.11 70.68 97.37 65.83 99.36 87.81
UDAFew-Shot95.80 97.95 67.92 96.50 62.88 98.91 86.66
Few-shot Inf. 90.38 88.79 48.75 92.63 44.21 82.46 74.54
UDGUnsupervised95.95 98.22 69.05 97.02 64.54 96.47 86.88
+ NLA 96.29 98.38 69.31 97.24 64.88 99.21 87.55
Table 2: Comparison of methods on text classiﬁcation datasets (Accuracy) . Results for XLNet are obtained
from (Yang et al., 2019) while results for BERT LARGE and UDA are from (Xie et al., 2019). The best result for
semi-supervised/few-shot setup is bolded while underline signiﬁes the overall best.
xq, and the model is expected to infer the correct
labelyqas the most probable next text sequence to
the input prompt:
yq= argmax
yPM(yj[T;Lfew;xq]): (1)
Since taking the argmax is intractable, yqis usually
obtained through greedy decoding or beam search.
Using much less task-speciﬁc data and no gradient
update, few-shot inference can obtain performance
comparable to ﬁne-tuning methods (e.g. GPT3 per-
forms similarly to ﬁne-tuned BERT on SuperGLUE
in Table 4). In its extreme format, giant language
models can also perform one-shot (K=1) or even
zero-shot (K=0) inference.
3.2 Unsupervised Data Generation
Despite these interesting ﬁndings, few-shot infer-
ence using giant language models still underper-
forms state-of-the-art ﬁne-tuned models on many
tasks. In Table 4, for instance, T5 largely outper-
forms GPT3 (89.3 vs 71.8) despite being much
smaller in model sizes (11B vs 175B). One poten-
tial limitation is that a language model is never
explicitly trained to directly conduct inference. In-
stead, it is trained as a text generator on unsuper-
vised web corpus where inputs ( X) and labels ( Y)
happen to coexist. Consequently, the few-shot in-
ference method ﬁnds the proper prompt that ‘forces’
the model to generate next text sequence Xnext
which happens to be the label Y . However, this
could be suboptimal since the labels often emerge
prior to the inputs in real-world web documents.
For example, in sentiment classiﬁcation of IMDb
movie reviews (Maas et al., 2011), the actual re-
view contexts appear after their corresponding rat-
ing scores. Therefore, few-shot inference can force
the language model to generate on text distributions
that are inconsistent with its training data.To this end, we propose to utilize language mod-
els to perform few-shot generation . Instead of
generating and predicting the label Y , we let the
model to generate the input X instead, decoupling
generation from prediction. We aim to formulate
the input prompts that are more likely to naturally
exist in the training corpus. Speciﬁcally, the model
is queried to generate xgcorresponding to a pseudo
label ^ygwith a prompt consisted of a small set of K
unlabeled examplesU=fxigK
i=1and a description
of the desired label:
xgPM(xj[T;U;Des(^yg)]); (2)
where Des()is a task-speciﬁc transformation func-
tion that maps a label class to natural language de-
scriptions, as illustrated in Figure 1. Different from
few-shot inference, our method only requires unsu-
pervised few-shot examples, a zero-label learning
setting. In addition, we use top-k sampling instead
of search-based decoding to sample text from the
language model. This allows us to generate a syn-
thetic labeled dataset Lsyn=f(xi
g;^yi
g)gns
i=1with
controllable size ns. We then train task-speciﬁc
models utilizing this synthetic dataset, either as
standalone training data or additional auxiliary data.
Unlike existing synthetic data generation systems,
our method requires no ﬁne-tuning step of the gen-
erative model and uses unsupervised data only, and
therefore we refer to it as Unsupervised Data Gen-
eration to emphasize its resource efﬁciency. We
also hope to emphasize that it is not our intention to
leverage the language model to perform generative
tasks, but just to take advantage of it to synthesize
“labeled” examples for downstream model training.
4 Experiments
4.1 Unsupervised Text Classiﬁcation
We ﬁrst apply the proposed UDG method on stan-
dard text classiﬁcation tasks.
K=0 K=1 K=4 K=32
IMDb Acc. 64.21 91.34 95.86 96.29
Yelp-2 Acc. 67.34 90.27 98.22 98.38
Amz-5 Acc. 47.35 58.79 62.14 64.88
Table 3: Ablation of number of examples in each
prompt.
Experimental Setups. We use six popular text
classiﬁcation benchmark datasets (Maas et al.,
2011; Zhang et al., 2015), including IMDb, Yelp-2,
Yelp-5, Amazon-2 and Amazon-5 sentiment clas-
siﬁcation and DBPedia topic classiﬁcation. We
mainly follow the experimental settings in Xie et al.
(2019) and use the corresponding unlabeled data
for each task. We apply similar preprocessing steps
to clean noisy web texts and truncate the input to
512 subword tokens. For each prompt, we sample
K= 32 unlabeled examples from the unlabeled
data and ﬁt as many examples as allowed by the
length of the language model’s context window (de-
tailed templates shown in Figure 1 and Appendix
C). This process is then repeated nc=ns
# Classtimes
for each label class, where we set nc= 10 Kfor
sentiment classiﬁcation tasks and 1000 for topic
classiﬁcation. We then utilize the language model
to generate one example for each prompt, resulting
in a synthetic labeled dataset of size ns. We use
an in-house language model, which is a variant of
the one in (Adiwardana et al., 2020) but trained
with larger data. We exploit top-k sampling with
K=40 and temperature=1.0, and only apply basic
post-processing to ﬁlter generated examples that
are too short/long.
Once we obtain the generated synthetic dataset
Lsyn, it can be utilized as labeled training data for
any task-speciﬁc training framework. Here, we
choose the state-of-the-art semi-supervised learn-
ing framework Unsupervised Data Augmentation
(UDA) (Xie et al., 2019) as the backbone. We use
BERT Large as our base model and follow the train-
ing protocol as described in the UDA paper to tune
our hyper-parameters. In our experiment, we ﬁnd
some generated examples are noisy adn thus we
additionally implement a Noisy Label Annealing
(NLA) technique to ﬁlter these examples during the
training process (See Appendix A for details).
Results. We compare models of trained using fully
supervised, semi-supervised/few-shot and unsuper-
vised settings in Table 2. We ﬁrst compare few-shot
inference using our giant language model with ﬁne-
Figure 2: Ablation of number of examples generated
per label class.
tuned methods. Despite requiring no additional
training costs, the few-shot inference paradigm
performs signiﬁcantly worse than supervised or
even semi-supervised UDA, which utilizes sim-
ilar amounts of labeled data. The gap is more
evident on multi-way classiﬁcation tasks such as
Yelp-5 or DBpedia, where the model is required
to predict complex labels beyond simple answers
such as ‘True/False’. In contrast, the proposed
few-shot generation paradigm obtains strong per-
formance while using less supervision. When com-
bined with NLA, our UDG framework consistently
outperforms UDA and few-shot inference on all six
tasks, achieving new state-of-the-art few-shot learn-
ing results. Besides, without using any label, our
method outperforms fully supervised BERT LARGE
on IMDb and Yelp-2 and is also competitive on
other tasks. Since both UDA and our method rely
onBERT LARGE , we expect using XLNet may fur-
ther boost our unsupervised performance, which
we choose to leave for future work.
Analysis. We ﬁrst examine the effect of data noisi-
ness on model performance. As is the case for other
data augmentation methods, few-shot generation
using giant language models can produce examples
that are inaccurate to the desired labels. To reduce
the negative impact of these noisy labels, we uti-
lize a simple NLA technique to ﬁlter out examples
when the task-speciﬁc models disagree with the
synthetic labels with high conﬁdence levels. As
shown in Table 2, NLA robustly improves UDG
performance on all tasks, especially ones that are
sensitive to noise such as DBpedia.
A crucial difference distinguishing our work
from existing data generation methods is that we di-
rectly query the pretrained language model without
any ﬁne-tuning nor supervision. To achieve this,
the model needs to not only infer correct knowl-
edge corresponding to the input pseudo label but
also generate text with similar styles of the sam-
BoolQ CB COPA MultiRC ReCoRD RTE WiC WSC Avg.
Human 89.0 95.8/98.9 100.0 81.8/51.9 91.7/91.3 93.6 80.0 100.0 89.8
BERT++a
Sup.79.0 84.8/90.4 73.8 70.0/24.1 72.0/71.3 71.7 69.6 64.4 71.5
RoBERTab87.1 90.5/95.2 90.6 84.4/52.5 90.6/90.0 88.2 69.9 89.0 84.6
T5c91.2 93.9/96.8 94.8 88.1/63.3 94.1/93.4 92.5 76.9 93.8 89.3
DeBERTad90.4 94.9/97.2 96.8 88.2/63.7 94.5/94.1 93.2 76.4 95.9 89.9
T5 + UDG 91.4 95.8/97.6 98.0 88.3/63.0 94.2/93.5 93.0 77.9 96.6 90.4
GPT3e
Few-Shot76.4 52.0/75.6 92.0 75.4/30.5 91.1/90.2 69.0 49.4 80.1 71.8
iPETf81.2 79.9/88.8 90.8 74.1/31.7 85.9/85.4 70.8 49.3 88.4 75.4
ADAPETg80.0 82.3/92.0 85.4 76.2/35.7 86.1/85.5 75.0 53.5 85.6 76.0
UDG Unsup. 81.0 86.2/92.4 80.4 81.1/47.1 82.8/81.8 80.7 67.5 79.5 78.1
Table 4: Comparison of single-model methods on SuperGLUE test scores. Results obtained from the ofﬁcial
SuperGLUE leaderboard2. The best result for semi-supervised/few-shot setup is underlined while bold signiﬁes
the overall best. Model references:aDevlin et al. (2018)bLiu et al. (2019)cRaffel et al. (2019)dDevlin et al. (2018)
eBrown et al. (2020)fSchick and Schütze (2020)gTam et al. (2021)
ple unsupervised examples. Thus, we compare
the results when the language model uses different
amounts of in-context examples in Table 3. The
model fails to generate high-quality data when no
sample is given, indicating the importance of few-
shot generation. On the other hand, including more
unsupervised examples does improve the quality
of synthetic dataset which leads to better perfor-
mance.
Finally, we evaluate the impact of the synthetic
data sizes in Figure 2. Despite there is a diminish-
ing return trend, we ﬁnd the ﬁnal performance to
continuously improve with more generated data,
showing that the language model can generate di-
verse examples. In addition, one key beneﬁt of
our method is that we can sample as much data as
needed with no additional cost or supervision. This
is particularly useful for tasks from low-resource
domains with limited unsupervised data available.
4.2 Unsupervised Language Understanding
To evaluate the proposed framework in a more chal-
lenging and comprehensive setting, we extend it to
perform on complex language understanding tasks.
Experimental Setups. We use the SuperGLUE
benchmark (Wang et al., 2019) for general-purpose
language understanding in English, which con-
sists of 8 natural language understanding tasks.
Tasks cover textual entailment (CB and RTE), ques-
tion answering (BoolQ, MultiRC and ReCoRD),
common sense reasoning (COPA), word sense dis-
ambiguation (WiC), and coreference resolution
(WSC). We mainly follow the same generation pro-
tocol as described in the previous sections, with
some minor changes in prompt templates and datapost-processing steps for speciﬁc tasks. As before,
we use K=32 unlabeled examples and generate us-
ing the same language model. For each task, we use
all original labeled data as unsupervised examples
for training data creation.
For the downstream model, we use T5 (Raffel
et al., 2019) for ﬁne-tuning on the created data.
Different from the released T5 checkpoints that are
pretrained on multi-task data, we pretrain our own
models on unsupervised Colossal Clean Crawled
Corpus (C4) data only and thus the combined
framework remains unsupervised. For fair com-
parison with existing models, we pretrain and then
ﬁne-tune a T5-Large model using the created data
set. Following Raffel et al. (2019), we use a ﬁne-
tuning batch size of 8 with 512 sequence length.
Results. We compare models trained under differ-
ent settings in Table 4. The GPT3 model (Brown
et al., 2020) using the few-shot inference method
outperform BERT++ with less supervision and no
ﬁne-tuning. However, despite containing much
more model parameters, it performs worse than
other ﬁne-tuned fully supervised models and few-
shot methods. On the other hand, our unsupervised
framework using few-shot generation outperforms
all few-shot learning systems without using any la-
bel, and thus it achieves new state-of-the-art results
on this benchmark for methods that exploit little-
to-no supervision. In particular, our performance
gains largely come from natural language entail-
ment tasks (CB and RTE) as well as word sense
disambiguation, where GPT3 performs similarly
to random guessing. This indicates that language
2https://super.gluebenchmark.com/
leaderboard
models do contain language knowledge that few-
shot inference fails to leverage.
4.3 UDG as Data Augmentation
In previous sections we only use the created exam-
ples as pseudo supervision to explore the limits of
transfer learning using language models. Nonethe-
less, the synthetic data can be also treated as aug-
mented data and combined with existing labeled
data. To this end, we ﬁne-tune the public T5-XXL
checkpoint using both labeled data and generated
data. As shown in Table 4, our method combines
well with existing labeled data and brings substan-
tial improvements. This is particularly the case
for tasks with small data sizes such as COPA and
WSC. Moreover, the combined model outperforms
not only prior methods but also the human base-
lines for the ﬁrst time on this important NLP bench-
mark, setting a new milestone for natural language
understanding with machine learning models.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a “zero-label” training
procedure and show that language models are also
few-shot example creators in that they can be used
to generate high-quality synthetic data in a fully un-
supervised manner. Through this, we demonstrate
that NLP models can obtain strong results without
any human annotated label. Our work illustrate
a promising direction for future transfer learning
research in NLP.
References
Daniel Adiwardana, Minh-Thang Luong, David R So,
Jamie Hall, Noah Fiedel, Romal Thoppilan, Zi Yang,
Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Gaurav Nemade, Yifeng Lu,
et al. 2020. Towards a human-like open-domain
chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977 .
Ateret Anaby-Tavor, Boaz Carmeli, Esther Goldbraich,
Amir Kantor, George Kour, Segev Shlomov, Naama
Tepper, and Naama Zwerdling. 2019. Not enough
data? deep learning to the rescue!
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 .
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace,
Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Katherine
Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ul-
far Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin Raffel. 2021.
Extracting training data from large language models.Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing.arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .
Mika Juuti, Tommi Gröndahl, Adrian Flanagan, and
N. Asokan. 2020. A little goes a long way: Im-
proving toxic language classiﬁcation despite data
scarcity. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 2991–
3009, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Varun Kumar, Ashutosh Choudhary, and Eunah Cho.
2021. Data augmentation using pre-trained trans-
former models.
Kenton Lee, Kelvin Guu, Luheng He, Tim Dozat, and
Hyung Won Chung. 2021. Neural data augmenta-
tion via example extrapolation.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
Andrew Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan
Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts. 2011.
Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the as-
sociation for computational linguistics: Human lan-
guage technologies , pages 142–150.
Yannis Papanikolaou and Andrea Pierleoni. 2020.
Dare: Data augmented relation extraction with gpt-
2.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton
Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H. Miller, and Se-
bastian Riedel. 2019. Language models as knowl-
edge bases?
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
blog, 1(8):9.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2019. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text trans-
former. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683 .
Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. 2020.
How much knowledge can you pack into the param-
eters of a language model? In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 5418–5426,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. 2020. It’s
not just size that matters: Small language mod-
els are also few-shot learners. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.07118 .
Derek Tam, Rakesh R Menon, Mohit Bansal, Shashank
Srivastava, and Colin Raffel. 2021. Improving
and simplifying pattern exploiting training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.11955 .
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia,
Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. 2019. Super-
glue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose
language understanding systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.00537 .
Chenguang Wang, Xiao Liu, and Dawn Song. 2020.
Language models are open knowledge graphs.
Jason W. Wei and Kai Zou. 2019. EDA: easy data aug-
mentation techniques for boosting performance on
text classiﬁcation tasks. In EMNLP-IJCNLP .
Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Eduard Hovy, Minh-Thang Lu-
ong, and Quoc V Le. 2019. Unsupervised data aug-
mentation for consistency training. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.12848 .
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le.
2019. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretrain-
ing for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.08237 .
Adams Wei Yu, David Dohan, Minh-Thang Luong, Rui
Zhao, Kai Chen, Mohammad Norouzi, and Quoc V .
Le. 2018. Qanet: Combining local convolution with
global self-attention for reading comprehension. In
ICLR .
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015.
Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-
siﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.01626 .
None 0.9!0.8 0.9!0.7 0.9!0.6 0.9!0.5
95.95 96.03 96.08 96.17 96.29
Table 5: Comparison of different annealing thresholds
on IMBd classiﬁcation. We observe performance im-
proves as we ﬁlter more aggresively.
A Noisy Label Annealing
Noisiness is a common issue for synthetic data gen-
eration. To mitigate this issue, prior work [CITE]
utilize extensive ﬁltering methods to select clean
generated examples. While one key beneﬁt of our
method being high-quality synthetic data with mini-
mal ﬁltering, we do ﬁnd some regularization during
ﬁnetuning to be helpful for better performance, es-
pecially on tasks sensitive to noises. In particular,
we obverse that the generated examples of the lan-
guage model may be misaligned with the desired
label class. Thus, we introduce a new training tech-
nique called Noisy Label Annealing (NLA), which
gradually ﬁlter out noisy training signals as training
progresses. Intuitively, we remove a speciﬁc train-
ing example if our model disagrees with its label
with high conﬁdence. Mathematically, at training
step t, a given example (xi
g;^yi
g)is considered noisy
and removed, if (1) the model’s predicted proba-
bilityP(yjxi
g)is higher than a threshold t, and
(2) the prediction yi= argmaxyP(yjxi
g)differs
from the synthetic label yi6= ^yi
g. We set the ini-
tial threshold 0to 0.9 and gradually anneal it to
1
KwhereKis the number of classes. Intuitively,
the model is less accurate at the early stage of the
ﬁnetuning process and thus we demand a very high
conﬁdence level to ﬁlter noises, whereas we can
safely decrease the “bar” as the model gets better
trained. We explore different ﬁnal annealing val-
ues in Table 5 and ﬁnd a more aggressive strategy
works often better.
B Finetuning Details
For text classiﬁcations, we mainly follow the ex-
perimental setups in (Xie et al., 2019). We truncate
the input to 512 subwords using BERT’s vocabu-
lary, keeping the last tokens. For the ﬁnetuning
process, we search the learning rate in {1e-5, 2e-5,
5e-5} and batch size in {32, 64, 128}. We also
tune the number of epochs based on the size of
generated data, ranging from 5 to 30. As with (Xie
et al., 2019), we also ﬁne-tune the BERT model
on in-domain unsupervised data prior to the ﬁnal
training stage. For UDA hyperparameters, we tunethe batch size and weight for both unsupervised
and generated data, as well as different strategies
of Training Signal Annealing (TSA). Notice that
TSA is orthogonal to our NLA technique and thus
we can apply them at the same time. Experiments
are conducted on 32 v3 TPUs.
For tasks in SuperGLUE, we follow the pretrain-
ing and ﬁnetuning setups in (Raffel et al., 2019).
For the unsupervised setting, we pretrain our own
T5-Large model using the exact same settings and
hyperparameters as the original paper, except that
we do not utilize the original downstream tasks
data for multi-task pretraining. For all ﬁnetuning,
we use a batch size of 8 and a sequence leangth
of 512, and utilize the dev scores to pick the best
checkpoint for submission to the test server for ﬁ-
nal evaluation. For more details, we refer readers
to the T5 paper (Raffel et al., 2019).
C Prompts & Generated Examples
C.1 Text Classiﬁcation
C.1.1 IMDb
Input Prompt:
Sample Movie Review: This is the most saccharine romance I ever
sat through. The perfect film for an idle housewife in kerchief,
housedress, and ostrich-trimmed high-heeled mules to watch in the
afternoon, lying on the couch eating bonbons. In fact, bonbons play a
prominent role in the movie. The only reason I was able to watch to
the end, is that I finally was able to gaze at Keanu Reeves’ dreamy
face in almost every scene. In most of his films, he moves too fast
to get a good look. The only rapid action in this show is Giancarlo
Giannini waving his hands with Latin emotionality - more Italian than
Mexican, really.
Negative Movie Review:
Generated Output:
This remake of the 1966 French film by François Truffaut and Claude
Chabrol is just plain awful. The only positive I can say about the
film is that the casting was just about perfect. Otherwise, the movie
has no redeeming qualities whatsoever. The plot is a mess and is
filled with numerous inconsistencies and continuity flaws throughout.
It is as if the director just made it up on the spot and made it up
bad!
C.1.2 Yelp-2
Input Prompt:
Sample Business Review: I had the most delicious burger ever! I also
ordered the truffle fries, which were amazing! The sauce they served
with the fries was also very good! Definitely come here!! There was
great service and wonderful food!
Positive Business Review:
Generated Output:
We had our wedding at The Grand in October of 2011. The Grand and
their staff are absolutely wonderful to work with. We had over 100
people at the wedding and the room was packed for the reception.
We had a great time and the service, food, and atmosphere were
fantastic. I can not say enough good things about working with and
having our wedding at The Grand. We highly recommend The Grand for
your wedding or special event.
C.1.3 Yelp-5
Input Prompt:
Yelp Review
Content: I waited FOR 35 MINUTES tonight just for 2 brisket meals
to go. They weren’t even hot when I arrived home and I live less
than 1 minute away. It was still a fine meal, saved by the amazing
cornbread!! But, I have no intention of going back any time soon.
Yelp Review
Rating: 3/5
Content:
Generated Output:
I came here to eat after the ridiculous long lines died down a bit.
I must say, I don’t get the hype about this place and felt a bit
disappointed. I suggested coming here with a group of friends. I was
pretty excited to eat here and found that nothing impressed me and
the price tag could not be justified. Nothing stood out for me that
would make me want to come here again. I think the highlight of my
meal was the ginseng chicken soup. All other items, I’ve had better
at other buffets. I didn’t think their selection was that impressive.
C.1.4 Amazon-2
Input Prompt:
Sample Product Review
Title: Nice to have
Content: My dog loves this bed. I don’t like to have my dog sleep
on the floor. I know I spoiled my dog. I put a huge pillow on top
of this bed to give her the extra comfort. My dog loves sleeping on
something soft. Now I have a happy dog that sleeps comfortably every
night. Money well spend.
Negative Product Review
Title:
Generated Output:
Not worth it
Content: I am so very disappointed. I bought this for my
granddaughter for Christmas. I have a few concerns, but first
and foremost, the box that the doll comes in says that it must be
assembled by an adult. The instructions are very confusing. My mom
and I put it together for her Christmas Eve. Then we realized that
the doll has a small hole in the back of the head that is on the end
of the seam. I don’t know where the hole came from, but since she is
a collectible, I can’t return it.
C.1.5 Amazon-5
Input Prompt:
Product Review
Title: Good Book
Content: Good book, easy to read, with a lot of suggestions about
where read the exposure. Also if the book is more than 150 pages,
there are a lot of big photos, everyone with a comment; instead of
this I would have prefereed more photos with comment also if they
would have been smaller. So, I read this book in too little time. My
rate for this book is 3.5.
Product Review
Rating: 3/5
Title:
Generated Output:
An ok game
Content: This game is good, but I wouldn’t buy this game unless you
are a star wars fan. The game has lots of levels and it takes quite a
while to beat. If you don’t know anything about star wars, you would
be lost on the story. There are lots of good things and bad things
about this game.
C.1.6 DBpedia
Input Prompt:
Wikipedia Article
Title: University of Georgia School of Law
Article: The University of Georgia School of Law (also referred to
as Georgia Law) is a graduate school of the University of Georgia.
Wikipedia Article
Category: Educational Institution
Title:
Generated Output:
Vanung University
Article: Vanung University (VNU) is a private university in Zhongli
City Taoyuan County Taiwan. It is the first private university in
Taiwan to be accredited by AACSB.
C.2 SuperGLUE
C.2.1 BoolQ
Input Prompt:
Article: Russian Blue -- Russian Blues are plush short-haired,
shimmering pale blue-gray cats with emerald green eyes. Guard
hairs are distinctly silver-tipped giving the cat a silvery sheen
or lustrous appearance. They have been used on a limited basis to
create other breeds such as the Havana Brown or alter existing breeds
such as the Nebelung. They are being used in Italy as a way to make
Oriental Shorthairs healthier and more robust called RUS4OSH in FIFe.
Sample statement based on the article: do all russian blue cats have
green eyes.
Article: Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium -- The Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium
(Okinawa Churaumi Suizokukan) is located within the Ocean Expo
Park in Okinawa, Japan. It welcomed its 20 millionth visitor on 30
March 2010 and is a member of the Japanese Association of Zoos and
Aquariums (JAZA). It was the largest aquarium in the world until it
was surpassed by the Georgia Aquarium in 2005. The aquarium has the
theme of ‘‘Encounter the Okinawan Sea’’.
False statement based on the article:
Generated Output:
is okinawa churaumi aquarium the largest aquarium in the world.
C.2.2 CB
Input Prompt:
Input: Jim waited. He waited a long time, and when the young doctor
finally came out, it was almost dark. Jim could nonetheless tell by
his anxious face that something was wrong.
Output: Something was wrong.
Input: She swallowed hard, unsure if she had the nerve to go ahead.
The memory of the pain in Tara’s eyes last night decided her. Did he
really expect her to believe that Tara was only the housekeeper?
Output: Contradicting this,
Generated Output:
Tara was only a temporary housekeeper.
C.2.3 COPA
Input Prompt:
Input: My body cast a shadow over the grass.
Output: The sun was rising.
Input: My computer screen went blank.
Connection: Because
Output:
Generated Output:
The power went out.
C.2.4 MultiRC
Input Prompt:
Article: On a day it celebrated 50 years of giving free legal advice,
Southern Arizona Legal Aid announced it has received two grants
totaling more than 7 million ...
Question: Who will the Web site benefit?
Answer: Help bridge the "digital divide" that keeps the poor from
using the Internet as a resource
Article: While this process moved along, diplomacy continued its
rounds. Direct pressure on the Taliban had proved unsuccessful ...
Question:
Generated Output:
Which country did President Bill Clinton visit on March 25, 2000?
Correct Answer: Pakistan
C.2.5 ReCoRD
Input Prompt:
Article: The harrowing stories of women and children locked up for
so-called ’moral crimes’ in Afghanistan’s notorious female prison
have been revealed after cameras were allowed inside. Mariam has been
in Badam Bagh prison for three months after she shot a man who just
raped her at gunpoint and then turned the weapon on herself - but
she has yet to been charged. Nuria has eight months left to serve
of her sentence for trying to divorce her husband. She gave birth
in prison to her son and they share a cell together. Scroll down for
video Nuria was jailed for trying to divorce her husband. Her son is
one of 62 children living at Badam Bagh prison.
Keyword: Badam Bagh prison ### Relevant Fact: The women and children
are jailed in Badam Bagh prison.
Article: China’s space agency today distributed fresh new pictures
of the Moon’s surface from its lunar lander and rover. The Jade
Rabbit rover can be seen trundling across the pockmarked surface of
Earth’s satellite in pictures released today by the Chinese Academy
of Sciences. The successful soft-landing of the Chang’e 3 lander
in December made China the third country to complete a lunar rover
mission after the United States and Russia. Chasing the horizon: The
sky over the Moon appears inky black in this picture showing the
Jade Rabbit rover trundling across the lunar surface taken from the
Chang’e 3 lander and released today by Chinese scientists.
Keyword: China ### Relevant Fact:
Generated Output:
Knock off or not, there’s no denying the ambition of the China’s Moon
mission, which on December 14 achieved the first lunar soft landing
in nearly four decades and aims at a manned mission by 2025.
C.2.6 RTE
Input Prompt:
Input: No Weapons of Mass Destruction Found in Iraq Yet.
Output: Weapons of Mass Destruction Found in Iraq.
Input: CBS newsman Harry Reasoner is returning to his Iowa hometown
to get married Saturday.
Output: In other words,
Generated Output:
Harry Reasoner is getting married.
C.2.7 WiC
Input Prompt:
Word: meet
Example: The company agrees to meet the cost of any repairs.
Word: skin
Definition 1:
Generated Output:
the outer covering of the body of a vertebrate animal.
Example: The skin of a snake.
C.2.8 WSC
Input Prompt:
Noun: Sam ### Pronoun: he ### Sample Sentence: Sam took French
classes from Adam , because he was eager to speak it fluently.
Noun: Ann ### Pronoun: She ### Sentence where She refers to Ann:
Generated Output:
It seems that Ann has had a run of bad luck. She never wins at cards.