Title: Constructing Datasets for Multi-hop Reading Comprehension Across Documents

Constructing Datasets
for Multi-hop Reading Comprehension Across Documents
Johannes Welbl1Pontus Stenetorp1Sebastian Riedel1;2
1University College London,2Bloomsbury AI
fj.welbl,p.stenetorp,s.riedel g@cs.ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
Most Reading Comprehension methods limit
themselves to queries which can be answered
using a single sentence, paragraph, or docu-
ment. Enabling models to combine disjoint
pieces of textual evidence would extend the
scope of machine comprehension methods,
but currently no resources exist to train and
test this capability. We propose a novel task to
encourage the development of models for text
understanding across multiple documents and
to investigate the limits of existing methods.
In our task, a model learns to seek and com-
bine evidence – effectively performing multi-
hop, alias multi-step, inference. We devise a
methodology to produce datasets for this task,
given a collection of query-answer pairs and
thematically linked documents. Two datasets
from different domains are induced,1and we
identify potential pitfalls and devise circum-
vention strategies. We evaluate two previ-
ously proposed competitive models and ﬁnd
that one can integrate information across doc-
uments. However, both models struggle to se-
lect relevant information; and providing doc-
uments guaranteed to be relevant greatly im-
proves their performance. While the mod-
els outperform several strong baselines, their
best accuracy reaches 54.5% on an annotated
test set, compared to human performance at
85.0%, leaving ample room for improvement.
1 Introduction
Devising computer systems capable of answering
questions about knowledge described using text has
1Available at http://qangaroo.cs.ucl.ac.uk
The Hanging Gardens, in [Mumbai], also known as Pherozeshah Mehta Gardens, are terraced gardens … They provide sunset views over the [Arabian Sea] …
Mumbai (also known as Bombay, the ofﬁcial name until 1995) is the capital city of the Indian state of Maharashtra. It is the most populous city in India …Q: (Hanging gardens of Mumbai, country, ?)  Options:  {Iran, India, Pakistan, Somalia, …}
The Arabian Sea is a region of the northern Indian Ocean bounded on the north by Pakistan and Iran, on the west by northeastern Somalia and the Arabian Peninsula, and on the east by India …Figure 1: A sample from the W IKIHOPdataset where it
is necessary to combine information spread across multi-
ple documents to infer the correct answer.
been a longstanding challenge in Natural Language
Processing (NLP). Contemporary end-to-end Read-
ing Comprehension (RC) methods can learn to ex-
tract the correct answer span within a given text
and approach human-level performance (Kadlec et
al., 2016; Seo et al., 2017a). However, for exist-
ing datasets, relevant information is often concen-
trated locally within a single sentence, emphasizing
the role of locating, matching, and aligning informa-
tion between query and support text. For example,
Weissenborn et al. (2017) observed that a simple bi-
nary word-in-query indicator feature boosted the rel-
ative accuracy of a baseline model by 27.9%.
We argue that, in order to further the ability of ma-
chine comprehension methods to extract knowledge
from text, we must move beyond a scenario where
relevant information is coherently and explicitly
stated within a single document. Methods with this
capability would aid Information Extraction (IE) ap-
plications, such as discovering drug-drug interac-arXiv:1710.06481v2  [cs.CL]  11 Jun 2018
tions (Gurulingappa et al., 2012) by connecting pro-
tein interactions reported across different publica-
tions. They would also beneﬁt search (Carpineto and
Romano, 2012) and Question Answering (QA) ap-
plications (Lin and Pantel, 2001) where the required
information cannot be found in a single location.
Figure 1 shows an example from W IKIPEDIA ,
where the goal is to identify the country property
of the Hanging Gardens of Mumbai . This cannot be
inferred solely from the article about them without
additional background knowledge, as the answer is
not stated explicitly. However, several of the linked
articles mention the correct answer India (and other
countries), but cover different topics (e.g. Mumbai ,
Arabian Sea , etc.). Finding the answer requires
multi-hop reasoning: ﬁguring out that the Hanging
Gardens are located in Mumbai , and then, from a
second document, that Mumbai is a city in India .
We deﬁne a novel RC task in which a model
should learn to answer queries by combining ev-
idence stated across documents. We introduce a
methodology to induce datasets for this task and de-
rive two datasets. The ﬁrst, W IKIHOP, uses sets of
WIKIPEDIA articles where answers to queries about
speciﬁc properties of an entity cannot be located in
the entity’s article. In the second dataset, M EDHOP,
the goal is to establish drug-drug interactions based
on scientiﬁc ﬁndings about drugs and proteins and
their interactions, found across multiple M EDLINE
abstracts. For both datasets we draw upon existing
Knowledge Bases (KBs), W IKIDATA and D RUG-
BANK, as ground truth, utilizing distant supervi-
sion (Mintz et al., 2009) to induce the data – similar
to Hewlett et al. (2016) and Joshi et al. (2017).
We establish that for 74.1% and 68.0% of the
samples, the answer can be inferred from the given
documents by a human annotator. Still, construct-
ing multi-document datasets is challenging; we en-
counter and prescribe remedies for several pitfalls
associated with their assembly – for example, spuri-
ous co-locations of answers and speciﬁc documents.
For both datasets we then establish several strong
baselines and evaluate the performance of two pre-
viously proposed competitive RC models (Seo et al.,
2017a; Weissenborn et al., 2017). We ﬁnd that one
can integrate information across documents, but nei-
ther excels at selecting relevant information from a
larger documents set, as their accuracy increases sig-niﬁcantly when given only documents guaranteed to
be relevant. The best model reaches 54.5% on an
annotated test set, compared to human performance
at 85.0%, indicating ample room for improvement.
In summary, our key contributions are as follows:
Firstly, proposing a cross-document multi-step RC
task, as well as a general dataset induction strat-
egy. Secondly, assembling two datasets from dif-
ferent domains and identifying dataset construction
pitfalls and remedies. Thirdly, establishing multiple
baselines, including two recently proposed RC mod-
els, as well as analysing model behaviour in detail
through ablation studies.
2 Task and Dataset Construction Method
We will now formally deﬁne the multi-hop RC task,
and a generic methodology to construct multi-hop
RC datasets. Later, in Sections 3 and 4 we will
demonstrate how this method is applied in practice
by creating datasets for two different domains.
Task Formalization A model is given a query q, a
set of supporting documents Sq, and a set of candi-
date answers Cq– all of which are mentioned in Sq.
The goal is to identify the correct answer a2Cq
by drawing on the support documents Sq. Queries
could potentially have several true answers when not
constrained to rely on a speciﬁc set of support doc-
uments – e.g., queries about the parent of a certain
individual. However, in our setup each sample has
only one true answer among CqandSq. Note that
even though we will utilize background information
during dataset assembly, such information will not
be available to a model: the document set will be
provided in random order and without any metadata.
While certainly beneﬁcial, this would distract from
our goal of fostering end-to-end RC methods that in-
fer facts by combining separate facts stated in text.
Dataset Assembly We assume that there exists a
document corpus D, together with a KB containing
fact triples (s; r; o )– with subject entity s, relation r,
and object entity o. For example, one such fact
could be (Hanging Gardens ofMumbai, country,
India) . We start with individual KB facts and trans-
form them into query-answer pairs by leaving the
object slot empty, i.e. q= (s; r;?)anda=o.
Next, we deﬁne a directed bipartite graph, where
vertices on one side correspond to documents in
D, and vertices on the other side are entities from
the KB – see Figure 2 for an example. A docu-
ment node dis connected to an entity eifeis men-
tioned in d, though there may be further constraints
when deﬁning the graph connectivity. For a given
(q; a)pair, the candidates Cqand support docu-
ments SqDare identiﬁed by traversing the bipar-
tite graph using breadth-ﬁrst search; the documents
visited will become the support documents Sq.
As the traversal starting point, we use the node
belonging to the subject entity sof the query q. As
traversal end points, we use the set of all entity nodes
that are type-consistent answers to q.2Note that
whenever there is another fact (s; r; o0)in the KB,
i.e. a fact producing the same qbut with a different
a, we will not include o0into the set of end points
for this sample. This ensures that precisely one of
the end points corresponds to a correct answer to q.3
When traversing the graph starting at s, several
end points will be visited, though generally not all;
those visited deﬁne the candidate set Cq. If however
the correct answer ais not among them we discard
the(q; a)pair. The documents visited to reach the
end points will deﬁne the support document set Sq.
That is, Sqcomprises chains of documents leading
not only from the query subject to the correct an-
swer, but also to type-consistent false candidates.
With this methodology, relevant textual evidence
for(q; a)will be spread across documents along
the chain connecting sanda– ensuring that multi-
hop reasoning goes beyond resolving co-reference
within a single document. Note that including
other type-consistent candidates alongside aas end
points in the graph traversal – and thus into the sup-
port documents – renders the task considerably more
challenging (Jia and Liang, 2017). Models could
otherwise identify ain the documents by simply
relying on type-consistency heuristics. It is worth
pointing out that by introducing alternative candi-
dates we counterbalance a type-consistency bias, in
contrast to Hermann et al. (2015) and Hill et al.
(2016) who instead rely on entity masking.
2To determine entities which are type-consistent for a
query q, we consider all entities which are observed as object
in a fact with ras relation type – including the correct answer.
3Here we rely on a closed-world assumption; that is, we as-
sume that the facts in the KB state all true facts.
Documents
EntitiesKB
(s, r, o)(s, r, o0)(s0,r ,o00)soo0o00
Figure 2: A bipartite graph connecting entities and doc-
uments mentioning them. Bold edges are those traversed
for the ﬁrst fact in the small KB on the right; yellow high-
lighting indicates documents in Sqand candidates in Cq.
Check and cross indicate correct and false candidates.
3 W IKIHOP
WIKIPEDIA contains an abundance of human-
curated, multi-domain information and has sev-
eral structured resources such as infoboxes and
WIKIDATA (Vrande ˇci´c, 2012) associated with it.
WIKIPEDIA has thus been used for a wealth of re-
search to build datasets posing queries about a single
sentence (Morales et al., 2016; Levy et al., 2017) or
article (Yang et al., 2015; Hewlett et al., 2016; Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016). However, no attempt has been
made to construct a cross-document multi-step RC
dataset based on W IKIPEDIA .
A recently proposed RC dataset is W IKIREAD-
ING (Hewlett et al., 2016), where W IKIDATA tu-
ples (item, property, answer) are aligned with
the W IKIPEDIA articles regarding their item . The
tuples deﬁne a slot ﬁlling task with the goal of pre-
dicting the answer , given an article andproperty .
One problem with using W IKIREADING as an ex-
tractive RC dataset is that 54.4% of the samples
do not state the answer explicitly in the given arti-
cle (Hewlett et al., 2016). However, we observed
that some of the articles accessible by following hy-
perlinks from the given article often state the answer,
alongside other plausible candidates.
3.1 Assembly
We now apply the methodology from Section 2
to create a multi-hop dataset with W IKIPEDIA as
the document corpus and W IKIDATA as structured
knowledge triples. In this setup, (item, property,
answer) WIKIDATA tuples correspond to (s; r; o )
triples, and the item andproperty of each sample
together form our query q– e.g., (Hanging Gardens
of Mumbai, country, ?) . Similar to Yang et al. (2015)
we only use the ﬁrst paragraph of an article, as rel-
evant information is more often stated in the begin-
ning. Starting with all samples in W IKIREADING ,
we ﬁrst remove samples where the answer is stated
explicitly in the W IKIPEDIA article about the item .4
The bipartite graph is structured as follows:
(1) for edges from articles to entities: all articles
mentioning an entity eare connected to e; (2) for
edges from entities to articles: each entity eis only
connected to the W IKIPEDIA article about the entity.
Traversing the graph is then equivalent to iteratively
following hyperlinks to new articles about the an-
chor text entities.
For a given query-answer pair, the item entity
is chosen as the starting point for the graph traver-
sal. A traversal will always pass through the article
about the item , since this is the only document con-
nected from there. The end point set includes the
correct answer alongside other type-consistent can-
didate expressions, which are determined by consid-
ering allfacts belonging to W IKIREADING train-
ing samples, selecting those triples with the same
property as inqand keeping their answer expres-
sions. As an example, for the W IKIDATA property
country , this would be the set fFrance ;Russia ; :::g.
We executed graph traversal up to a maximum chain
length of 3 documents. To not pose unreasonable
computational constraints, samples with more than
64 different support documents or 100 candidates
are removed, discarding 1% of the samples.
3.2 Mitigating Dataset Biases
Dataset creation is always fraught with the risk of
inducing unintended errors and biases (Chen et al.,
2016; Schwartz et al., 2017). As Hewlett et al.
(2016) only carried out limited analysis of their
WIKIREADING dataset, we present an analysis of
the downstream effects we observe on W IKIHOP.
Candidate Frequency Imbalance A ﬁrst obser-
vation is that there is a signiﬁcant bias in the answer
distribution of W IKIREADING . For example, in the
majority of the samples the property country has
theUnited States of America as the answer. A simple
4We thus use a disjoint subset of W IKIREADING compared
to Levy et al. (2017) to construct W IKIHOP.majority class baseline would thus prove successful,
but would tell us little about multi-hop reasoning. To
combat this issue, we subsampled the dataset to en-
sure that samples of any one particular answer can-
didate make up no more than 0:1%of the dataset,
and omitted articles about the United States .
Document-Answer Correlations A problem
unique to our multi-document setting is the possibil-
ity of spurious correlations between candidates and
documents induced by the graph traversal method.
In fact, if we were notto address this issue, a model
designed to exploit these regularities could achieve
74.6% accuracy (detailed in Section 6).
Concretely, we observed that certain documents
frequently co-occur with the correct answer, inde-
pendently of the query. For example, if the article
about London is present in Sq, the answer is likely
to be the United Kingdom , independent of the query
type or entity in question. Appendix C contains a
list with several additional examples.
We designed a statistic to measure this effect
and then used it to sub-sample the dataset. The
statistic counts how often a candidate cis observed
as the correct answer when a certain document is
present in Sqacross training set samples. More for-
mally, for a given document dand answer candi-
datec, letcooccurrence (d; c)denote the total count
of how often dco-occurs with cin a sample where
cis also the correct answer. We use this statistic
to ﬁlter the dataset, by discarding samples with at
least one document-candidate pair (d; c)for which
cooccurrence (d; c)>20.
4 M EDHOP
Following the same general methodology, we next
construct a second dataset for the domain of molec-
ular biology – a ﬁeld that has been undergoing ex-
ponential growth in the number of publications (Co-
hen and Hunter, 2004). The promise of applying
NLP methods to cope with this increase has led to
research efforts in IE (Hirschman et al., 2005; Kim
et al., 2011) and QA for biomedical text (Hersh et
al., 2007; Nentidis et al., 2017). There are a plethora
of manually curated structured resources (Ashburner
et al., 2000; The UniProt Consortium, 2017) which
can either serve as ground truth or to induce training
data using distant supervision (Craven and Kumlien,
1999; Bobic et al., 2012). Existing RC datasets are
either severely limited in size (Hersh et al., 2007)
or cover a very diverse set of query types (Nentidis
et al., 2017), complicating the application of neu-
ral models that have seen successes for other do-
mains (Wiese et al., 2017).
A task that has received signiﬁcant attention is
detecting Drug-Drug Interactions (DDIs). Exist-
ing DDI efforts have focused on explicit mentions
of interactions in single sentences (Gurulingappa
et al., 2012; Percha et al., 2012; Segura-Bedmar
et al., 2013). However, as shown by Peng et al.
(2017), cross-sentence relation extraction increases
the number of available relations. It is thus likely
that cross-document interactions would further im-
prove recall, which is of particular importance con-
sidering interactions that are never stated explicitly
– but rather need to be inferred from separate pieces
of evidence. The promise of multi-hop methods is
ﬁnding and combining individual observations that
can suggest previously unobserved DDIs, aiding the
process of making scientiﬁc discoveries, yet not di-
rectly from experiments, but by inferring them from
established public knowledge (Swanson, 1986).
DDIs are caused by Protein-Protein Interac-
tion (PPI) chains, forming biomedical pathways.
If we consider PPI chains across documents,
we ﬁnd examples like in Figure 3. Here the
ﬁrst document states that the drug Leuprolide
causes GnRH receptor -induced synaptic potenti-
ations, which can be blocked by the protein
Progonadoliberin-1 . The last document states that
another drug, Triptorelin , is a superagonist of the
same protein. It is therefore likely to affect the po-
tency of Leuprolide , describing a way in which the
two drugs interact. Besides the true interaction there
is also a false candidate Urofollitropin for which,
although mentioned together with GnRH receptor
within one document, there is no textual evidence
indicating interactions with Leuprolide .
4.1 Assembly
We construct M EDHOPusing D RUGBANK (Law
et al., 2014) as structured knowledge resource and
research paper abstracts from M EDLINE as docu-
ments. There is only one relation type for D RUG-
BANK facts, interacts with , that connects pairs of
drugs – an example of a M EDHOPquery would thus
Q:  (Leuprolide, interacts_with, ?)  Options:  {Triptorelin, Urofollitropin}
Leuprolide ... elicited a long-lasting potentiation of excitatory postsynaptic currents… [GnRH receptor]-induced synaptic potentiation was blocked … by [Progonadoliberin-1], a speciﬁc [GnRH receptor] antagonist…
Analyses of gene expression demonstrated a dynamic response to the Progonadoliberin-1 superagonist Triptorelin.
… our research to study the distribution, co-localization of Urofollitropin and its receptor[,] and co-localization of Urofollitropin and GnRH receptor…Figure 3: A sample from the M EDHOPdataset.
be(Leuprolide, interacts with, ?) . We start
by processing the 2016 M EDLINE release using the
preprocessing pipeline employed for the BioNLP
2011 Shared Task (Stenetorp et al., 2011). We re-
strict the set of entities in the bipartite graph to
drugs in D RUGBANK and human proteins in S WISS -
PROT (Bairoch et al., 2004). That is, the graph has
drugs and proteins on one side, and M EDLINE ab-
stracts on the other.
The edge structure is as follows: (1) There is an
edge from a document to all proteins mentioned in it.
(2) There is an edge between a document and a drug,
if this document also mentions a protein known to be
a target for the drug according to D RUGBANK. This
edge is bidirectional, i.e. it can be traversed both
ways, since there is no canonical document describ-
ing each drug – thus one can “hop” to any document
mentioning the drug and its target. (3) There is an
edge from a protein pto a document mentioning p,
but only if the document also mentions another pro-
teinp0which is known to interact with paccording to
REACTOME (Fabregat et al., 2016). Given our dis-
tant supervision assumption, these additionally con-
straining requirements err on the side of precision.
As a mention, similar to Percha et al. (2012), we
consider any exact match of a name variant of a
drug or human protein in D RUGBANK or S WISS -
PROT. For a given DDI (drug 1, interacts with,
drug 2), we then select drug 1as the starting point
for the graph traversal. As possible end points, we
consider any other drug, apart from drug 1and those
interacting with drug 1other than drug 2. Similar to
WIKIHOP, we exclude samples with more than 64
support documents and impose a maximum docu-
ment length of 300 tokens plus title.
Document Sub-sampling The bipartite graph for
MEDHOPis orders of magnitude more densely con-
nected than for W IKIHOP. This can lead to poten-
tially large support document sets Sq, to a degree
where it becomes computationally infeasible for a
majority of existing RC models. After the traver-
sal has ﬁnished, we subsample documents by ﬁrst
adding a set of documents that connects the drug in
the query with its answer. We then iteratively add
documents to connect alternative candidates until we
reach the limit of 64 documents – while ensuring
that all candidates have the same number of paths
through the bipartite graph.
Mitigating Candidate Frequency Imbalance
Some drugs interact with more drugs than others
–Aspirin for example interacts with 743 other
drugs, but Isotretinoin with only 34. This leads
to similar candidate frequency imbalance issues
as with W IKIHOP– but due to its smaller size
MEDHOPis difﬁcult to sub-sample. Nevertheless
we can successfully combat this issue by masking
entity names, detailed in Section 6.2.
5 Dataset Analysis
Table 1 shows the dataset sizes. Note that W IK-
IHOPinherits the train, development, and test set
splits from W IKIREADING – i.e., the full dataset
creation, ﬁltering, and sub-sampling pipeline is ex-
ecuted on each set individually. Also note that sub-
sampling according to document-answer correlation
signiﬁcantly reduces the size of W IKIHOPfrom
528K training samples to 44K. While in terms of
samples, both W IKIHOPand M EDHOPare smaller
than other large-scale RC datasets, such as SQuAD
and W IKIREADING , the supervised learning signal
available per sample is arguably greater. One could,
for example, re-frame the task as binary path clas-
siﬁcation: given two entities and a document path
connecting them, determine whether a given rela-
tion holds. For such a case, W IKIHOPand M ED-
HOPwould have more than 1M and 150K paths to
be classiﬁed, respectively. Instead, in our formula-
tion, this corresponds to each single sample contain-
ing the supervised learning signal from an average
of 19.5 and 59.8 unique document paths.
Table 2 shows statistics on the number of candi-
dates and documents per sample on the respective
training sets. For M EDHOP, the majority of sam-
ples have 9 candidates, due to the way documentsTrain Dev Test Total
WIKIHOP 43,738 5,129 2,451 51,318
MEDHOP 1,620 342 546 2,508
Table 1: Dataset sizes for our respective datasets.
min max avg median
# cand. – WH 2 79 19.8 14
# docs. – WH 3 63 13.7 11
# tok/doc – WH 4 2,046 100.4 91
# cand. – MH 2 9 8.9 9
# docs. – MH 5 64 36.4 29
# tok/doc – MH 5 458 253.9 264
Table 2: Candidates and documents per sample and doc-
ument length statistics. WH: W IKIHOP; MH: M EDHOP.
are selected up until a maximum of 64 documents is
reached. Few samples have less than 9 candidates,
and samples would have far more false candidates if
more than 64 support documents were included. The
number of query types in W IKIHOPis 277, whereas
in M EDHOPthere is only one: interacts with .
5.1 Qualitative Analysis
To establish the quality of the data and analyze po-
tential distant supervision errors, we sampled and
annotated 100 samples from each development set.
WIKIHOP Table 3 lists characteristics along with
the proportion of samples that exhibit them. For
45%, the true answer either uniquely follows from
multiple texts directly or is suggested as likely. For
26%, more than one candidate is plausibly sup-
ported by the documents, including the correct an-
swer. This is often due to hypernymy, where
the appropriate level of granularity for the an-
swer is difﬁcult to predict – e.g. (west suffolk,
administrative entity, ?) with candidates
suffolk and england . This is a direct conse-
quence of including type-consistent false answer
candidates from W IKIDATA , which can lead to ques-
tions with several true answers. For 9% of the
cases a single document sufﬁces; these samples
contain a document that states enough information
about item and answer together. For example,
the query (Louis Auguste, father, ?) has the
correct answer Louis XIV of France , and French
Unique multi-step answer. 36%
Likely multi-step unique answer. 9%
Multiple plausible answers. 15%
Ambiguity due to hypernymy. 11%
Only single document required. 9%
Answer does not follow. 12%
WIKIDATA /WIKIPEDIA discrepancy. 8%
Table 3: Qualitiative analysis of W IKIHOPsamples.
king Louis XIV is mentioned within the same doc-
ument as Louis Auguste . Finally, although our
task is signiﬁcantly more complex than most pre-
vious tasks where distant supervision has been ap-
plied, the distant supervision assumption is only vi-
olated for 20% of the samples – a proportion sim-
ilar to previous work (Riedel et al., 2010). These
cases can either be due to conﬂicting information be-
tween W IKIDATA and W IKIPEDIA (8%), e.g. when
the date of birth for a person differs between W IKI-
DATA and what is stated in the W IKIPEDIA article,
or because the answer is consistent but cannot be
inferred from the support documents (12%). When
answering 100 questions, the annotator knew the an-
swer prior to reading the documents for 9%, and pro-
duced the correct answer after reading the document
sets for 74% of the cases. On 100 questions of a val-
idated portion of the Dev set (see Section 5.3), 85%
accuracy was reached.
MEDHOP Since both document complexity and
number of documents per sample were signiﬁcantly
larger compared to W IKIHOP, (see Figure 4 in Ap-
pendix B) it was not feasible to ask an annota-
tor to read allsupport documents for 100 samples.
We opted to verify the dataset quality by providing
only the subset of documents relevant to support the
correct answer, i.e., those traversed along the path
reaching the answer. The annotator was asked if the
answer to the query “follows” ,“is likely” , or“does
not follow” , given the relevant documents. 68% of
the cases were considered as “follows” or as “is
likely” . The majority of cases violating the distant
supervision assumption were due to lacking a nec-
essary PPI in one of the connecting documents.5.2 Crowdsourced Human Annotation
We asked human annotators on Amazon Mechanical
Turk to evaluate samples of the W IKIHOPdevelop-
ment set. Similar to our qualitative analysis of M ED-
HOP, annotators were shown the query-answer pair
as a fact and the chain of relevant documents leading
to the answer. They were then instructed to answer
(1) whether they knew the fact before; (2) whether
the fact follows from the texts (with options “fact
follows” ,“fact is likely” , and “fact does not fol-
low” ); and (3); whether a single or several of the
documents are required. Each sample was shown to
three annotators and a majority vote was used to ag-
gregate the annotations. Annotators were familiar
with the fact 4.6% of the time; prior knowledge of
the fact is thus not likely to be a confounding effect
on the other judgments. Inter-annotator agreement
as measured by Fleiss’ kappa is 0.253 in (2), and
0.281 in (3) – indicating a fair overall agreement, ac-
cording to Landis and Koch (1977). Overall, 9.5%
of samples have no clear majority in (2).
Among samples with a majority judgment, 59.8%
are cases where the fact “follows” , for 14.2% the
fact is judged as “likely” , and as “not follow” for
25.9%. This again provides good justiﬁcation for
the distant supervision strategy.
Among the samples with a majority vote for (2)
of either “follows” or“likely” , 55.9% were marked
with a majority vote as requiring multiple docu-
ments to infer the fact, and 44.1% as requiring only
a single document. The latter number is larger than
initially expected, given the construction of samples
through graph traversal. However, when inspecting
cases judged as “single” more closely, we observed
that many indeed provide a clear hint about the cor-
rect answer within one document, but without stat-
ing it explicitly. For example, for the fact (witold
cichy, country ofcitizenship, poland) with
documents d1: Witold Cichy (born March 15, 1986
in Wodzisaw lski) is a Polish footballer[...] andd2:
Wodzisaw lski[...] is a town in Silesian Voivodeship,
southern Poland[...] , the information provided in d1
sufﬁces for a human given the background knowl-
edge that Polish is an attribute related to Poland , re-
moving the need for d2to infer the answer.
5.3 Validated Test Sets
While training models on distantly supervised data
is useful, one should ideally evaluate methods on a
manually validated test set. We thus identiﬁed sub-
sets of the respective test sets for which the correct
answer can be inferred from the text. This is in con-
trast to prior work such as Hermann et al. (2015),
Hill et al. (2016), and Hewlett et al. (2016), who
evaluate only on distantly supervised samples. For
WIKIHOP, we applied the same annotation strategy
as described in Section 5.2. The validated test set
consists of those samples labeled by a majority of
annotators (at least 2 of 3) as “follows” , and requir-
ing“multiple” documents. While desirable, crowd-
sourcing is not feasible for M EDHOPsince it re-
quires specialist knowledge. In addition, the number
of document paths is 3x larger, which along with
the complexity of the documents greatly increases
the annotation time. We thus manually annotated
20% of the M EDHOPtest set and identiﬁed the sam-
ples for which the text implies the correct answer
and where multiple documents are required.
6 Experiments
This section describes experiments on W IKIHOP
and M EDHOPwith the goal of establishing the per-
formance of several baseline models, including re-
cent neural RC models. We empirically demonstrate
the importance of mitigating dataset biases, probe
whether multi-step behavior is beneﬁcial for solv-
ing the task, and investigate if RC models can learn
to perform lexical abstraction. Training will be con-
ducted on the respective training sets, and evaluation
on both the full test set and validated portion (Sec-
tion 5.3) allowing for a comparison between the two.
6.1 Models
Random Selects a random candidate; note that the
number of candidates differs between samples.
Max-mention Predicts the most frequently men-
tioned candidate in the support documents Sqof a
sample – randomly breaking ties.
Majority-candidate-per-query-type Predicts the
candidate c2Cqthat was most frequently observed
as the true answer in the training set, given the querytype of q. For W IKIHOP, the query type is the prop-
ertypof the query; for M EDHOPthere is only the
single query type – interacts with .
TF-IDF Retrieval-based models are known to be
strong QA baselines if candidate answers are pro-
vided (Clark et al., 2016; Welbl et al., 2017). They
search for individual documents based on keywords
in the question, but typically do not combine infor-
mation across documents. The purpose of this base-
line is to see if it is possible to identify the correct
answer from a single document alone through lexi-
cal correlations. The model forms its prediction as
follows: For each candidate c, the concatenation of
the query qwithcis fed as an ORquery into the
whoosh text retrieval engine.5It then predicts the
candidate with the highest TF-IDF similarity score:
arg max
c2Cq[max
s2Sq(TF-IDF (q+c; s))] (1)
Document-cue During dataset construction we
observed that certain document-answer pairs appear
more frequently than others, to the effect that the
correct candidate is often indicated solely by the
presence of certain documents in Sq. This baseline
captures how easy it is for a model to exploit these
informative document-answer co-occurrences. It
predicts the candidate with highest score across Cq:
arg max
c2Cq[max
d2Sq(cooccurrence (d; c))] (2)
Extractive RC models: FastQA and BiDAF In
our experiments we evaluate two recently proposed
LSTM -based extractive QA models: the Bidirec-
tional Attention Flow model ( BiDAF , Seo et al.
(2017a)), and FastQA (Weissenborn et al., 2017),
which have shown a robust performance across sev-
eral datasets. These models predict an answer span
within a single document. We adapt them to a multi-
document setting by sequentially concatenating all
d2Sqin random order into a superdocument,
adding document separator tokens. During training,
the ﬁrst answer mention in the concatenated docu-
ment serves as the gold span.6At test time, we mea-
sured accuracy based on the exact match between
5https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Whoosh/
6We also tested assigning the gold span randomly to any
one of the mention of the answer, with insigniﬁcant changes.
the prediction and answer, both lowercased, after re-
moving articles, trailing white spaces and punctu-
ation, in the same way as Rajpurkar et al. (2016).
To rule out any signal stemming from the order of
documents in the superdocument, this order is ran-
domized both at training and test time. In a prelimi-
nary experiment we also trained models using differ-
ent random document order permutations, but found
that performance did not change signiﬁcantly.
ForBiDAF , the default hyperparameters from the
implementation of Seo et al. (2017a) are used, with
pretrained GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) embed-
dings. However, we restrict the maximum docu-
ment length to 8,192 tokens and hidden size to 20,
and train for 5,000 iterations with batchsize 16 in or-
der to ﬁt the model into memory.7ForFastQA we
use the implementation provided by the authors, also
with pre-trained GloVe embeddings, no character-
embeddings, no maximum support length, hidden
size 50, and batch size 64 for 50 epochs.
While BiDAF andFastQA were initially devel-
oped and tested on single-hop RC datasets, their us-
age of bidirectional LSTMs and attention over the
full sequence theoretically gives them the capacity
to integrate information from different locations in
the (super-)document. In addition, BiDAF employs
iterative conditioning across multiple layers, poten-
tially making it even better suited to integrate infor-
mation found across the sequence.
6.2 Lexical Abstraction: Candidate Masking
The presence of lexical regularities among an-
swers is a problem in RC dataset assembly – a
phenomenon already observed by Hermann et al.
(2015). When comprehending a text, the correct an-
swer should become clear from its context – rather
than from an intrinsic property of the answer ex-
pression. To evaluate the ability of models to rely
on context alone, we created masked versions of
the datasets: we replace any candidate expression
randomly using 100 unique placeholder tokens, e.g.
“Mumbai is the most populous city in MASK7 . ”
Masking is consistent within one sample, but gen-
erally different for the same expression across sam-
ples. This not only removes answer frequency cues,
7The superdocument has a larger number of tokens com-
pared to e.g. SQuAD , thus the additional memory requirements.Model Unﬁltered Filtered
Document-cue 74.6 36.7
Maj. candidate 41.2 38.8
TF-IDF 43.8 25.6
Train set size 527,773 43,738
Table 4: Accuracy comparison for simple baseline mod-
els on W IKIHOPbefore andafter ﬁltering.
it also removes statistical correlations between fre-
quent answer strings and support documents. Mod-
els consequently cannot base their prediction on in-
trinsic properties of the answer expression, but have
to rely on the context surrounding the mentions.
6.3 Results and Discussion
Table 5 shows the experimental outcomes for W IK-
IHOPand M EDHOP, together with results for the
masked setting; we will ﬁrst discuss the former. A
ﬁrst observation is that candidate mention frequency
does not produce better predictions than a random
guess. Predicting the answer most frequently ob-
served at training time achieves strong results: as
much as 38.8% / 44.2% and 58.4% / 67.3% on the
two datasets, for the full and validated test sets re-
spectively. That is, a simple frequency statistic to-
gether with answer type constraints alone is a rela-
tively strong predictor, and the strongest overall for
the“unmasked” version of M EDHOP.
The TF-IDF retrieval baseline clearly performs
better than random for W IKIHOP, but is not very
strong overall. That is, the question tokens are help-
ful to detect relevant documents, but exploiting only
this information compares poorly to the other base-
lines. On the other hand, as no co-mention of an
interacting drug pair occurs within any single doc-
ument in M EDHOP, the TF-IDF baseline performs
worse than random. We conclude that lexical match-
ing with a single support document is not enough to
build a strong predictive model for both datasets.
TheDocument-cue baseline can predict more than
a third of the samples correctly, for both datasets,
even after sub-sampling frequent document-answer
pairs for W IKIHOP. The relative strength of this
and other baselines proves to be an important is-
sue when designing multi-hop datasets, which we
addressed through the measures described in Sec-
WIKIHOP MEDHOP
standard masked standard masked
Model test test* test test* test test* test test*
Random 11.5 12.2 12.2 13.0 13.9 20.4 14.1 22.4
Max-mention 10.6 15.9 13.9 20.1 9.5 16.3 9.2 16.3
Majority-candidate-per-query-type 38.8 44.2 12.0 13.7 58.4 67.3 10.4 6.1
TF-IDF 25.6 36.7 14.4 24.2 9.0 14.3 8.8 14.3
Document-cue 36.7 41.7 7.4 20.3 44.9 53.1 15.2 16.3
FastQA 25.7 27.2 35.8 38.0 23.1 24.5 31.3 30.6
BiDAF 42.9 49.7 54.5 59.8 47.8 61.2 33.7 42.9
Table 5: Test accuracies for the W IKIHOPand M EDHOPdatasets, both in standard (unmasked) and masked setup.
Columns marked with asterisk are for the validated portion of the dataset.
WIKIHOP MEDHOP
standard gold chain standard gold chain
Model test test* test test* test test* test test*
BiDAF 42.9 49.7 57.9 63.4 47.8 61.2 86.4 89.8
BiDAF mask 54.5 59.8 81.2 85.7 33.7 42.9 99.3 100.0
FastQA 25.7 27.2 44.5 53.5 23.1 24.5 54.6 59.2
FastQA mask 35.8 38.0 65.3 70.0 31.3 30.6 51.8 55.1
Table 6: Test accuracy comparison when only using documents leading to the correct answer (gold chain). Columns
with asterisk hold results for the validated samples.
tion 3.2. In Table 4 we compare the two relevant
baselines on W IKIHOPbefore and after applying
ﬁltering measures. The absolute strength of these
baselines before ﬁltering shows how vital address-
ing this issue is: 74.6% accuracy could be reached
through exploiting the cooccurrence (d; c)statistic
alone. This underlines the paramount importance of
investigating and addressing dataset biases that oth-
erwise would confound seemingly strong RC model
performance. The relative drop demonstrates that
the measures undertaken successfully mitigate the
issue. A downside to aggressive ﬁltering is a signif-
icantly reduced dataset size, rendering it infeasible
for smaller datasets like M EDHOP.
Among the two neural models, BiDAF is overall
strongest across both datasets – this is in contrast to
the reported results for SQuAD where their perfor-
mance is nearly indistinguishable. This is possibly
due to the iterative latent interactions in the BiDAF
architecture: we hypothesize that these are of in-
creased importance for our task, where informationis distributed across documents. It is worth empha-
sizing that unlike the other baselines, both FastQA
andBiDAF predict the answer by extracting a span
from the support documents without relying on the
candidate options Cq.
In the masked setup all baseline models reliant on
lexical cues fail in the face of the randomized answer
expressions, since the same answer option has dif-
ferent placeholders in different samples. Especially
on M EDHOP, where dataset sub-sampling is not a
viable option, masking proves to be a valuable alter-
native, effectively circumventing spurious statistical
correlations that RC models can learn to exploit.
Both neural RC models are able to largely retain
or even improve their strong performance when an-
swers are masked: they are able to leverage the tex-
tual context of the candidate expressions. To under-
stand differences in model behavior between W IK-
IHOPand M EDHOP, it is worth noting that drug
mentions in M EDHOPare normalized to a unique
single-word identiﬁer, and performance drops under
WIKIHOP MEDHOP
test test* test test*
BiDAF 54.5 59.8 33.7 42.9
BiDAF rem 44.6 57.7 30.4 36.7
FastQA 35.8 38.0 31.3 30.6
FastQA rem 38.0 41.2 28.6 24.5
Table 7: Test accuracy (masked) when only documents
containing answer candidates are given ( rem).
masking. In contrast, for the open-domain setting of
WIKIHOP, a reduction of the answer vocabulary to
100 random single-token mask expressions clearly
helps the model in selecting a candidate span, com-
pared to the multi-token candidate expressions in the
unmasked setting. Overall, although both neural RC
models clearly outperform the other baselines, they
still have large room for improvement compared to
human performance at 74% / 85% for W IKIHOP.
Comparing results on the full and validated test
sets, we observe that the results consistently improve
on the validated sets. This suggests that the training
set contains the signal necessary to make inference
on valid samples at test time, and that noisy samples
are harder to predict.
6.4 Using only relevant documents
We conducted further experiments to examine the
RC models when presented with only the relevant
documents in Sq, i.e., the chain of documents lead-
ing to the correct answer. This allows us to investi-
gate the hypothetical performance of the models if
they were able to select and read only relevant docu-
ments: Table 6 summarizes these results. Models
improve greatly in this gold chain setup, with up
to 81.2% / 85.7% on W IKIHOPin the masked set-
ting for BiDAF . This demonstrates that RC models
are capable of identifying the answer when few or
no plausible false candidates are mentioned, which
is particularly evident for M EDHOP, where docu-
ments tend to discuss only single drug candidates.
In the masked gold chain setup, models can then
pick up on what the masking template looks like
and achieve almost perfect scores. Conversely, these
results also show that the models’ answer selec-
tion process is not robust to the introduction of un-
related documents with type-consistent candidates.This indicates that learning to intelligently select rel-
evant documents before RC may be among the most
promising directions for future model development.
6.5 Removing relevant documents
To investigate if the neural RC models can draw
upon information requiring multi-step inference we
designed an experiment where we discard all doc-
uments that do not contain candidate mentions, in-
cluding the ﬁrst documents traversed. Table 7 shows
the results: we can observe that performance drops
across the board for BiDAF . There is a signiﬁcant
drop of 3.3%/6.2% on M EDHOP, and 10.0%/2.1%
on W IKIHOP, demonstrating that BiDAF , is able
to leverage cross-document information. FastQA
shows a slight increase of 2.2%/3.2% for W IKIHOP
and a decrease of 2.7%/4.1% on M EDHOP. While
inconclusive, it is clear that FastQA with fewer la-
tent interactions than BiDAF has problems integrat-
ing cross-document information.
7 Related Work
Related Datasets End-to-end text-based QA has
witnessed a surge in interest with the advent of large-
scale datasets, which have been assembled based
on F REEBASE (Berant et al., 2013; Bordes et al.,
2015), W IKIPEDIA (Yang et al., 2015; Rajpurkar
et al., 2016; Hewlett et al., 2016), web search
queries (Nguyen et al., 2016), news articles (Her-
mann et al., 2015; Onishi et al., 2016), books (Hill
et al., 2016; Paperno et al., 2016), science ex-
ams (Welbl et al., 2017), and trivia (Boyd-Graber
et al., 2012; Dunn et al., 2017). Besides Trivi-
aQA (Joshi et al., 2017), all these datasets are con-
ﬁned to single documents, and RC typically does not
require a combination of multiple independent facts.
In contrast, W IKIHOPand M EDHOPare speciﬁ-
cally designed for cross-document RC and multi-
step inference. There exist other multi-hop RC re-
sources, but they are either very limited in size,
such as the FraCaS test suite, or based on synthetic
language (Weston et al., 2016). TriviaQA partly
involves multi-step reasoning, but the complexity
largely stems from parsing compositional questions.
Our datasets center around compositional inference
from comparatively simple queries and the cross-
document setup ensures that multi-step inference
goes beyond resolving co-reference.
Compositional Knowledge Base Inference
Combining multiple facts is common for struc-
tured knowledge resources which formulate facts
using ﬁrst-order logic. KB inference methods
include Inductive Logic Programming (Quinlan,
1990; Pazzani et al., 1991; Richards and Mooney,
1991) and probabilistic relaxations to logic like
Markov Logic (Richardson and Domingos, 2006;
Schoenmackers et al., 2008). These approaches
suffer from limited coverage and inefﬁcient infer-
ence, though efforts to circumvent sparsity have
been undertaken (Schoenmackers et al., 2008;
Schoenmackers et al., 2010). A more scalable
approach to composite rule learning is the Path
Ranking Algorithm (Lao and Cohen, 2010; Lao et
al., 2011), which performs random walks to identify
salient paths between entities. Gardner et al. (2013)
circumvent these sparsity problems by introducing
synthetic links via dense latent embeddings. Several
other methods have been proposed, using compo-
sition functions such as vector addition (Bordes
et al., 2014), RNNs (Neelakantan et al., 2015;
Das et al., 2017), and memory networks (Jain,
2016). Another approach is the Neural Theorem
Prover (Rockt ¨aschel and Riedel, 2017), which
uses dense rule and symbol embeddings to learn a
differentiable backward chaining algorithm.
All of these previous approaches center around
learning how to combine facts from a KB, i.e., in
a structured form with pre-deﬁned schema. That
is, they work as part of a pipeline, and either rely
on the output of a previous IE step (Banko et al.,
2007), or on direct human annotation (Bollacker et
al., 2008) which tends to be costly and biased in cov-
erage. However, recent neural RC methods (Seo et
al., 2017a; Shen et al., 2017) have demonstrated that
end-to-end language understanding approaches can
infer answers directly from text – sidestepping in-
termediate query parsing and IE steps. Our work
aims to evaluate whether end-to-end multi-step RC
models can indeed operate on raw text documents
only – while performing the kind of inference most
commonly associated with logical inference meth-
ods operating on structured knowledge.
Text-Based Multi-Step Reading Comprehension
Fried et al. (2015) have demonstrated that exploit-ing information from other related documents based
on lexical semantic similarity is beneﬁcial for re-
ranking answers in open-domain non-factoid QA.
Jansen et al. (2017) chain textual background re-
sources for science exam QA and provide multi-
sentence answer explanations. Beyond, a rich col-
lection of neural models tailored towards multi-step
RC has been developed. Memory networks (We-
ston et al., 2015; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Kumar
et al., 2016) deﬁne a model class that iteratively
attends over textual memory items, and they show
promising performance on synthetic tasks requiring
multi-step reasoning (Weston et al., 2016). One
common characteristic of neural multi-hop models
is their rich structure that enables matching and in-
teraction between question, context, answer candi-
dates and combinations thereof (Peng et al., 2015;
Weissenborn, 2016; Xiong et al., 2017; Liu and
Perez, 2017), which is often iterated over several
times (Sordoni et al., 2016; Neumann et al., 2016;
Seo et al., 2017b; Hu et al., 2017) and may contain
trainable stopping mechanisms (Graves, 2016; Shen
et al., 2017). All these methods show promise for
single-document RC, and by design should be capa-
ble of integrating multiple facts across documents.
However, thus far they have not been evaluated for a
cross-document multi-step RC task – as in this work.
Learning Search Expansion Other research ad-
dresses expanding the document set available to
a QA system, either in the form of web navi-
gation (Nogueira and Cho, 2016), or via query
reformulation techniques, which often use neural
reinforcement learning (Narasimhan et al., 2016;
Nogueira and Cho, 2017; Buck et al., 2018). While
related, this work ultimately aims at reformulating
queries to better acquire evidence documents, and
not at answering queries through combining facts.
8 Conclusions and Future Work
We have introduced a new cross-document multi-
hop RC task, devised a generic dataset derivation
strategy and applied it to two separate domains. The
resulting datasets test RC methods in their ability to
perform composite reasoning – something thus far
limited to models operating on structured knowledge
resources. In our experiments we found that contem-
porary RC models can leverage cross-document in-
formation, but a sizeable gap to human performance
remains. Finally, we identiﬁed the selection of rele-
vant document sets as the most promising direction
for future research.
Thus far, our datasets center around factoid ques-
tions about entities, and as extractive RC datasets,
it is assumed that the answer is mentioned verba-
tim. While this limits the types of questions one can
ask, these assumptions can facilitate both training
and evaluation, and future work – once free-form ab-
stractive answer composition has advanced – should
move beyond. We hope that our work will foster
research on cross-document information integration,
working towards these long term goals.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reviewers and the ac-
tion editor for their thoughtful and constructive sug-
gestions, as well as Matko Bo ˇsnjak, Tim Dettmers,
Pasquale Minervini, Jeff Mitchell, and Sebastian
Ruder for several helpful comments and feedback
on drafts of this paper. This work was supported by
an Allen Distinguished Investigator Award, a Marie
Curie Career Integration Award, the EU H2020
SUMMA project (grant agreement number 688139),
and an Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council scholarship.
References
Michael Ashburner, Catherine A. Ball, Judith A. Blake,
David Botstein, Heather Butler, J. Michael Cherry, Al-
lan P. Davis, Kara Dolinski, Selina S. Dwight, Janan T.
Eppig, Midori A. Harris, David P. Hill, Laurie Issel-
Tarver, Andrew Kasarskis, Suzanna Lewis, John C.
Matese, Joel E. Richardson, Martin Ringwald, Ger-
ald M. Rubin, and Gavin Sherlock. 2000. Gene on-
tology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. Nature Ge-
netics , 25(1):25.
Amos Bairoch, Brigitte Boeckmann, Serenella Ferro, and
Elisabeth Gasteiger. 2004. Swiss-Prot: Juggling be-
tween evolution and stability. Brieﬁngs in Bioinfor-
matics , 5(1):39–55.
Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen Soderland,
Matt Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007. Open infor-
mation extraction from the web. In Proceedings of the
20th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcal Intel-
ligence , IJCAI’07, pages 2670–2676.
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy
Liang. 2013. Semantic parsing on freebase fromquestion-answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 1533–1544.
Tamara Bobic, Roman Klinger, Philippe Thomas, and
Martin Hofmann-Apitius. 2012. Improving distantly
supervised extraction of drug-drug and protein-protein
interactions. In Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on
Unsupervised and Semi-Supervised Learning in NLP ,
pages 35–43.
Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim
Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: a collabo-
ratively created graph database for structuring human
knowledge. In SIGMOD 08 Proceedings of the 2008
ACM SIGMOD international conference on Manage-
ment of data , pages 1247–1250.
Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston. 2014.
Question answering with subgraph embeddings. In
Empirical Methods for Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) , pages 615–620.
Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Sumit Chopra, and
Jason Weston. 2015. Large-scale simple ques-
tion answering with memory networks. CoRR ,
abs/1506.02075.
Jordan Boyd-Graber, Brianna Satinoff, He He, and Hal
Daum ´e, III. 2012. Besting the quiz master: Crowd-
sourcing incremental classiﬁcation games. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning , EMNLP-
CoNLL ’12, pages 1290–1301.
Christian Buck, Jannis Bulian, Massimiliano Ciaramita,
Andrea Gesmundo, Neil Houlsby, Wojciech Gajewski,
and Wei Wang. 2018. Ask the right questions: Ac-
tive question reformulation with reinforcement learn-
ing. International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR) .
Claudio Carpineto and Giovanni Romano. 2012. A sur-
vey of automatic query expansion in information re-
trieval. ACM Comput. Surv. , 44(1):1:1–1:50, January.
Danqi Chen, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D. Manning.
2016. A thorough examination of the CNN/Daily Mail
reading comprehension task. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
2358–2367.
Peter Clark, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sab-
harwal, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Turney, and Daniel
Khashabi. 2016. Combining retrieval, statistics, and
inference to answer elementary science questions. In
Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence , AAAI’16, pages 2580–2586.
Kevin Bretonnel Cohen and Lawrence Hunter. 2004.
Natural language processing and systems biology. Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence Methods and Tools for Systems Bi-
ology , pages 147–173.
Mark Craven and Johan Kumlien. 1999. Constructing
biological knowledge bases by extracting information
from text sources. In Proceedings of the Seventh Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molec-
ular Biology , pages 77–86.
Rajarshi Das, Arvind Neelakantan, David Belanger, and
Andrew McCallum. 2017. Chains of reasoning over
entities, relations, and text using recurrent neural net-
works. European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (EACL) , pages 132–141.
Matthew Dunn, Levent Sagun, Mike Higgins, V . Ugur
G¨uney, V olkan Cirik, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2017.
SearchQA: A new Q&A dataset augmented with con-
text from a search engine. CoRR , abs/1704.05179.
Antonio Fabregat, Konstantinos Sidiropoulos, Phani
Garapati, Marc Gillespie, Kerstin Hausmann, Robin
Haw, Bijay Jassal, Steven Jupe, Florian Korninger,
Sheldon McKay, Lisa Matthews, Bruce May, Mar-
ija Milacic, Karen Rothfels, Veronica Shamovsky,
Marissa Webber, Joel Weiser, Mark Williams, Guan-
ming Wu, Lincoln Stein, Henning Hermjakob, and
Peter D’Eustachio. 2016. The Reactome path-
way knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Research ,
44(D1):D481–D487.
Daniel Fried, Peter Jansen, Gustave Hahn-Powell, Mihai
Surdeanu, and Peter Clark. 2015. Higher-order lexi-
cal semantic models for non-factoid answer reranking.
Transactions of the Association of Computational Lin-
guistics , 3:197–210.
Matt Gardner, Partha Pratim Talukdar, Bryan Kisiel, and
Tom M. Mitchell. 2013. Improving learning and infer-
ence in a large knowledge-base using latent syntactic
cues. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 833–
838.
Alex Graves. 2016. Adaptive computation time for re-
current neural networks. CoRR , abs/1603.08983.
Harsha Gurulingappa, Abdul Mateen Rajput, Angus
Roberts, Juliane Fluck, Martin Hofmann-Apitius, and
Luca Toldo. 2012. Development of a benchmark cor-
pus to support the automatic extraction of drug-related
adverse effects from medical case reports. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics , 45(5):885 – 892. Text Min-
ing and Natural Language Processing in Pharmacoge-
nomics.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefen-
stette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Suleyman,
and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching machines to read
and comprehend. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pages 1693–1701.William Hersh, Aaron Cohen, Lynn Ruslen, and Phoebe
Roberts. 2007. TREC 2007 genomics track overview.
InNIST Special Publication .
Daniel Hewlett, Alexandre Lacoste, Llion Jones, Illia
Polosukhin, Andrew Fandrianto, Jay Han, Matthew
Kelcey, and David Berthelot. 2016. WIKIREADING:
A novel large-scale language understanding task over
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the The 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL 2016) , pages 1535–1545.
Felix Hill, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Jason We-
ston. 2016. The goldilocks principle: Reading chil-
dren’s books with explicit memory representations.
ICLR .
Lynette Hirschman, Alexander Yeh, Christian Blaschke,
and Alfonso Valencia. 2005. Overview of BioCre-
AtIvE: Critical assessment of information extraction
for biology. BMC Bioinformatics , 6(1):S1, May.
Minghao Hu, Yuxing Peng, and Xipeng Qiu. 2017.
Mnemonic reader for machine comprehension. CoRR ,
abs/1705.02798.
Sarthak Jain. 2016. Question answering over knowledge
base using factual memory networks. In Proceedings
of NAACL-HLT , pages 109–115.
Peter Jansen, Rebecca Sharp, Mihai Surdeanu, and Peter
Clark. 2017. Framing QA as building and ranking in-
tersentence answer justiﬁcations. Computational Lin-
guistics , 43(2):407–449.
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2017. Adversarial exam-
ples for evaluating reading comprehension systems. In
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) .
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S. Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehen-
sion. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics , July.
Rudolf Kadlec, Martin Schmid, Ondrej Bajgar, and Jan
Kleindienst. 2016. Text understanding with the at-
tention sum reader network. Proceedings of the 54th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 908–918.
Jin-Dong Kim, Yue Wang, Toshihisa Takagi, and Akinori
Yonezawa. 2011. Overview of Genia event task in
BioNLP shared task 2011. In Proceedings of BioNLP
Shared Task 2011 Workshop , pages 7–15.
Ankit Kumar, Ozan Irsoy, Peter Ondruska, Mohit Iyyer,
Ishaan Gulrajani James Bradbury, Victor Zhong, Ro-
main Paulus, and Richard Socher. 2016. Ask me
anything: Dynamic memory networks for natural lan-
guage processing. International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning , 48:1378–1387.
J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics , pages 159–174.
Ni Lao and William W Cohen. 2010. Relational re-
trieval using a combination of path-constrained ran-
dom walks. Machine learning , 81(1):53–67.
Ni Lao, Tom Mitchell, and William W Cohen. 2011.
Random walk inference and learning in a large scale
knowledge base. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 529–539.
Vivian Law, Craig Knox, Yannick Djoumbou, Tim Jew-
ison, An Chi Guo, Yifeng Liu, Adam Maciejew-
ski, David Arndt, Michael Wilson, Vanessa Neveu,
Alexandra Tang, Geraldine Gabriel, Carol Ly, Sakina
Adamjee, Zerihun T. Dame, Beomsoo Han, You Zhou,
and David S. Wishart. 2014. DrugBank 4.0: Shed-
ding new light on drug metabolism. Nucleic Acids Re-
search , 42(D1):D1091–D1097.
Omer Levy, Minjoon Seo, Eunsol Choi, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2017. Zero-shot relation extraction via read-
ing comprehension. In Proceedings of the 21st Con-
ference on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL 2017) , pages 333–342, August.
Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Discovery of in-
ference rules for question-answering. Nat. Lang. Eng. ,
7(4):343–360, December.
Fei Liu and Julien Perez. 2017. Gated end-to-end mem-
ory networks. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, EACL 2017, Volume 1: Long
Papers , pages 1–10.
Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Daniel Juraf-
sky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation extraction
without labeled data. In Proceedings of the Joint Con-
ference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and
the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing of the AFNLP , pages 1003–1011.
Alvaro Morales, Varot Premtoon, Cordelia Avery, Sue
Felshin, and Boris Katz. 2016. Learning to answer
questions from Wikipedia infoboxes. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing , pages 1930–1935.
Karthik Narasimhan, Adam Yala, and Regina Barzilay.
2016. Improving information extraction by acquiring
external evidence with reinforcement learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2016 ,
pages 2355–2365.
Arvind Neelakantan, Benjamin Roth, and Andrew Mc-
Callum. 2015. Compositional vector space models for
knowledge base completion. Proceedings of the 53rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for ComputationalLinguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing , pages 156–166.
Anastasios Nentidis, Konstantinos Bougiatiotis, Anasta-
sia Krithara, Georgios Paliouras, and Ioannis Kakadi-
aris. 2017. Results of the ﬁfth edition of the BioASQ
challenge. In BioNLP 2017 , pages 48–57.
Mark Neumann, Pontus Stenetorp, and Sebastian Riedel.
2016. Learning to reason with adaptive computation.
InInterpretable Machine Learning for Complex Sys-
tems at the 2016 Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS) , Barcelona, Spain, Decem-
ber.
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao,
Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and Li Deng.
2016. MS MARCO: A human generated ma-
chine reading comprehension dataset. CoRR ,
abs/1611.09268.
Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2016. WebNav:
A new large-scale task for natural language based se-
quential decision making. CoRR , abs/1602.02261.
Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2017. Task-
oriented query reformulation with reinforcement
learning. Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 574–583.
Takeshi Onishi, Hai Wang, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gim-
pel, and David A. McAllester. 2016. Who did what:
A large-scale person-centered cloze dataset. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2016 ,
pages 2230–2235.
Denis Paperno, Germ ´an Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazari-
dou, Ngoc Quan Pham, Raffaella Bernardi, Sandro
Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel
Fernandez. 2016. The LAMBADA dataset: Word pre-
diction requiring a broad discourse context. In Pro-
ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 1525–1534.
Michael Pazzani, Clifford Brunk, and Glenn Silverstein.
1991. A knowledge-intensive approach to learning re-
lational concepts. In Proceedings of the Eighth Inter-
national Workshop on Machine Learning , pages 432–
436, Evanston, IL.
Baolin Peng, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Kam-Fai
Wong. 2015. Towards neural network-based reason-
ing. CoRR , abs/1508.05508.
Nanyun Peng, Hoifung Poon, Chris Quirk, Kristina
Toutanova, and Wen-tau Yih. 2017. Cross-sentence
N-ary relation extraction with graph LSTMs. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
5:101–115.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In Proceedings of the Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
1532–1543.
Bethany Percha, Yael Garten, and Russ B Altman. 2012.
Discovery and explanation of drug-drug interactions
via text mining. In Paciﬁc symposium on biocomput-
ing, page 410. NIH Public Access.
John Ross Quinlan. 1990. Learning logical deﬁnitions
from relations. Machine Learning , 5:239–266.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 2383–2392.
Bradley L. Richards and Raymond J. Mooney. 1991.
First-order theory revision. In Proceedings of the
Eighth International Workshop on Machine Learning ,
pages 447–451, Evanston, IL.
Matthew Richardson and Pedro Domingos. 2006.
Markov logic networks. Mach. Learn. , 62(1-2):107–
136.
Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Modeling relations and their mentions with-
out labeled text. In Proceedings of the 2010 European
Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Dis-
covery in Databases: Part III , ECML PKDD’10,
pages 148–163.
Tim Rockt ¨aschel and Sebastian Riedel. 2017. End-to-
end differentiable proving. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 30 , pages 3788–3800.
Stefan Schoenmackers, Oren Etzioni, and Daniel S.
Weld. 2008. Scaling textual inference to the web.
InEMNLP ’08: Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 79–88.
Stefan Schoenmackers, Oren Etzioni, Daniel S. Weld,
and Jesse Davis. 2010. Learning ﬁrst-order horn
clauses from web text. In Proceedings of the 2010
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , EMNLP ’10, pages 1088–1098.
Roy Schwartz, Maarten Sap, Ioannis Konstas, Leila
Zilles, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. 2017. The
effect of different writing tasks on linguistic style: A
case study of the ROC story cloze task. In Proceed-
ings of the 21st Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL 2017) , pages 15–25.
Isabel Segura-Bedmar, Paloma Mart ´ınez, and Mar ´ıa Her-
rero Zazo. 2013. SemEval-2013 Task 9: Extraction of
drug-drug interactions from biomedical texts (DDIEx-
traction 2013). In Second Joint Conference on Lexi-
cal and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2:Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013) , pages 341–350.
Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2017a. Bidirectional attention
ﬂow for machine comprehension. In The International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
Minjoon Seo, Sewon Min, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh
Hajishirzi. 2017b. Query-reduction networks for
question answering. ICLR .
Yelong Shen, Po-Sen Huang, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu
Chen. 2017. ReasoNet: Learning to stop reading in
machine comprehension. In Proceedings of the 23rd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’17, pages
1047–1055.
Alessandro Sordoni, Phillip Bachman, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2016. Iterative alternating neural attention for
machine reading. CoRR , abs/1606.02245.
Pontus Stenetorp, Goran Topi ´c, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko
Ohta, Jin-Dong Kim, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2011.
BioNLP shared task 2011: Supporting resources. In
Proceedings of BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop ,
pages 112–120.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, and
Rob Fergus. 2015. End-to-end memory networks. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pages 2440–2448.
Don R. Swanson. 1986. Undiscovered public knowl-
edge. The Library Quarterly , 56(2):103–118.
The UniProt Consortium. 2017. UniProt: the univer-
sal protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Research ,
45(D1):D158–D169.
Denny Vrande ˇci´c. 2012. Wikidata: A new platform
for collaborative data collection. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on World Wide Web ,
WWW ’12 Companion, pages 1063–1064.
Dirk Weissenborn, Georg Wiese, and Laura Seiffe. 2017.
Making neural QA as simple as possible but not sim-
pler. In Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2017) ,
pages 271–280. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Dirk Weissenborn. 2016. Separating answers from
queries for neural reading comprehension. CoRR ,
abs/1607.03316.
Johannes Welbl, Nelson F. Liu, and Matt Gardner. 2017.
Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions. In
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Noisy User-
generated Text , pages 94–106.
Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes. 2015.
Memory networks. ICLR .
Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Towards AI-complete ques-
tion answering: A set of prerequisite toy tasks. ICLR .
Georg Wiese, Dirk Weissenborn, and Mariana Neves.
2017. Neural question answering at BioASQ 5B. In
Proceedings of the BioNLP 2017 , pages 76–79.
Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Richard Socher.
2017. Dynamic coattention networks for question an-
swering. ICLR .
Yi Yang, Wen-tau Yih, and Christopher Meek. 2015.
WikiQA: A challenge dataset for open-domain ques-
tion answering. In Proceedings of the 2015 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing , pages 2013–2018.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
number of documents0.000.020.040.060.08dataset proportionWikiHop
MedHopFigure 4: Support documents per training sample.
A Appendix: Versions
This paper directly corresponds to the TACL ver-
sion,8apart from minor changes in wording, addi-
tional footnotes, and these appendices.
B Appendix: Candidate and Document
statistics
Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of the number of
support documents per sample. W IKIHOPshows a
Poisson-like behaviour – most likely due to struc-
tural regularities in W IKIPEDIA – whereas M EDHOP
exhibits a bimodal distribution, in line with our ob-
servation that certain drugs and proteins have far
more interactions and studies associated with them.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of document
lengths for both datasets. Note that the document
lengths in W IKIHOPcorrespond to the lengths of
the ﬁrst paragraphs of W IKIPEDIA articles. M ED-
HOPon the other hand reﬂects the length of research
paper abstracts, which are generally longer.
Figure 6 shows a histogram with the number of
candidates per sample in W IKIHOP, and the distri-
bution shows a slow but steady decrease. For M ED-
HOP, the vast majority of samples have 9 candidates,
which is due to the way documents are selected up
until a maximum of 64 documents is reached. Very
few samples have fewer than 9 candidates, and sam-
ples would have far more false candidates if more
than 64 support documents were included.
8https://transacl.org/ojs/index.php/
tacl/article/view/1325
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
document length0.000.020.040.060.08dataset proportionWikiHop
MedHopFigure 5: Histogram for document lengths in W IKIHOP
and M EDHOP.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
number of candidates0.000.010.020.030.040.05dataset proportionWikiHop
Figure 6: Histogram for the number of candidates per
sample in W IKIHOP.
C Appendix: Document-Cue examples
Table 8 shows examples of answers and articles
which, before ﬁltering, frequently appear together in
WIKIHOP.
D Appendix: Gold Chain Examples
Table 9 shows examples of document gold chains
in W IKIHOP. Note that their lengths differ, with a
maximum of 3 documents.
E Appendix: Query Types
Table 10 gives an overview over the 25 most fre-
quent query types in W IKIHOPand their relative
proportion in the dataset. Overall, the distribution
across the 277 query types follows a power law.
Answer a Wikipedia article d Count Prop.
united states of
americaAU.S. state is a constituent political entity of the United States of America. 68,233 12.9%
united kingdom England is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. 54,005 10.2%
taxon In biology, a species (abbreviated sp., with the plural form species abbre-
viated spp.) is the basic unit of biological classiﬁcation and a taxonomic
rank.40,141 7.6%
taxon A genus (pl.genera ) is a taxonomic rank used in the biological classiﬁca-
tion38,466 7.3%
united kingdom The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , commonly
known as the United Kingdom (UK) or Britain, is a sovereign country in
western Europe.31,071 5.9%
taxon Biology is a natural science concerned with the study of life and living or-
ganisms, including their structure, function, growth, evolution, distribution,
identiﬁcation and taxonomy.27,609 5.2%
united kingdom Scotland [...] is a country that is part of the United Kingdom and covers the
northern third of the island of Great Britain.25,456 4.8%
united kingdom Wales [...] is a country that is part of the United Kingdom and the island of
Great Britain.21,961 4.2%
united kingdom London [...] is the capital and most populous city of England and the United
Kingdom, as well as the most populous city proper in the European Union.21,920 4.2%
... ... ...
united states of
americaNevada (Spanish for ”snowy”; see pronunciations) is a state in the Western,
Mountain West, and Southwestern regions of the United States of America.18,215 3.4%
... ... ...
italy The comune [...] is a basic administrative division in Italy, roughly equiva-
lent to a township or municipality.8,785 1.7%
... ... ...
human settle-
mentAtown is a human settlement larger than a village but smaller than a city. 5,092 1.0%
... ... ...
people’s repub-
lic of chinaShanghai [...] often abbreviated as Hu or Shen, is one of the four direct-
controlled municipalities of the People’s Republic of China.3,628 0.7%
Table 8: Examples with largest cooccurrence (d; c)statistic, before ﬁltering. The Count column states
cooccurrence (d; c); the last column states the corresponding relative proportion of training samples (total 527,773).
Query: (the big broadcast of 1937, genre, ?)
Answer: musical ﬁlm
Text 1: TheBig Broadcast of 1937 is a 1936 Paramount Pictures production directed by Mitchell Leisen,
and is the third in the series of Big Broadcast movies. The musical comedy stars Jack Benny, George Burns,
Gracie Allen, Bob Burns, Martha Raye, Shirley Ross [...]
Text 2: Shirley Ross (January 7, 1913 March 9, 1975) was an American actress and singer, notable for her
duet with Bob Hope, ”Thanks for the Memory” from ”The Big Broadcast of 1938”[...]
Text 3: The Big Broadcast of 1938 is a Paramount Pictures musical ﬁlm featuring W.C. Fields and Bob
Hope. Directed by Mitchell Leisen, the ﬁlm is the last in a series of ”Big Broadcast” movies[...]
Query: (cmos, subclass of, ?)
Answer: semiconductor device
Text 1: Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) [...] is a technology for constructing inte-
grated circuits. [...] CMOS uses complementary and symmetrical pairs of p-type and n-type metal oxide
semiconductor ﬁeld effect transistors (MOSFETs) for logic functions. [...]
Text 2: Atransistor is a semiconductor device used to amplify or switch electronic signals[...]
Query: (raik dittrich, sport, ?)
Answer: biathlon
Text 1: Raik Dittrich (born October 12, 1968 in Sebnitz) is a retired East German biathlete who won two
World Championships medals. He represented the sports club SG Dynamo Zinnwald [...]
Text 2: SG Dynamo Zinnwald is a sector of SV Dynamo located in Altenberg, Saxony[...] The main sports
covered by the club are biathlon , bobsleigh, luge, mountain biking, and Skeleton (sport)[...]
Query: (minnesota gubernatorial election, ofﬁce contested, ?)
Answer: governor
Text 1: The 1936 Minnesota gubernatorial election took place on November 3, 1936. Farmer-Labor Party
candidate Elmer Austin Benson defeated Republican Party of Minnesota challenger Martin A. Nelson.
Text 2: Elmer Austin Benson [...] served as the 24th governor of Minnesota, defeating Republican Martin
Nelson in a landslide victory in Minnesota’s 1936 gubernatorial election.[...]
Query: (ieee transactions on information theory, publisher, ?)
Answer: institute of electrical and electronics engineers
Text 1: IEEE Transactions on Information Theory is a monthly peer-reviewed scientiﬁc journal pub-
lished by the IEEE Information Theory Society [...] the journal allows the posting of preprints [...]
Text 2: TheIEEE Information Theory Society (ITS or ITSoc), formerly the IEEE Information Theory
Group, is a professional society of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) [...]
Query: (country ofcitizenship, louis-philippe ﬁset, ?)
Answer: canada
Text1: Louis-Philippe Fiset [...] was a local physician and politician in the Mauricie area [...]
Text2: Mauricie is a traditional and current administrative region of Quebec. La Mauricie National Park is
contained within the region, making it a prime tourist location. [...]
Text3: La Mauricie National Park is located near Shawinigan in the Laurentian mountains, in the Mauricie
region of Quebec, Canada [...]
Table 9: Examples of document gold chains in W IKIHOP. Article titles are boldfaced, the correct answer is underlined.
Query Type Proportion in Dataset
instance of 10.71 %
located intheadministrative territorial entity 9.50 %
occupation 7.28 %
place ofbirth 5.75 %
record label 5.27 %
genre 5.03 %
country ofcitizenship 3.45 %
parent taxon 3.16 %
place ofdeath 2.46 %
inception 2.20 %
date ofbirth 1.84 %
country 1.70 %
headquarters location 1.52 %
part of 1.43 %
subclass of 1.40 %
sport 1.36 %
member ofpolitical party 1.29 %
publisher 1.16 %
publication date 1.06 %
country oforigin 0.92 %
languages spoken orwritten 0.92 %
date ofdeath 0.90 %
original language ofwork 0.85 %
followed by 0.82 %
position held 0.79 %
Top 25 72.77 %
Top 50 86.42 %
Top 100 96.62 %
Top 200 99.71 %
Table 10: The 25 most frequent query types in W IKIHOPalongside their proportion in the training set.