Title: Learning Natural Language Inference using Bidirectional LSTM model and Inner-Attention

arXiv:1605.09090v1  [cs.CL]  30 May 2016Learning Natural LanguageInference using Bidirectional L STM modeland
Inner-Attention
YangLiu, Chengjie Sun, Lei Lin andXiaolongWang
Harbin InstituteofTechnology,Harbin,P.R.China
{yliu,cjsun,linl,wangxl }@insun.hit.edu.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we proposed a sentence
encoding-basedmodelforrecognizingtexten-
tailment. In our approach, the encoding of
sentence is a two-stage process. Firstly, av-
erage pooling was used over word-level bidi-
rectional LSTM (biLSTM) to generatea ﬁrst-
stage sentence representation. Secondly, at-
tention mechanism was employed to replace
averagepoolingonthe same sentence forbet-
ter representations. Instead of using target
sentence to attend words in source sentence,
weutilizedthesentence’sﬁrst-stagerepresen-
tationtoattendwordsappearedinitself,which
is called ”Inner-Attention” in our paper . Ex-
perimentsconductedonStanfordNaturalLan-
guage Inference (SNLI) Corpus has proved
the effectiveness of ”Inner-Attention” mech-
anism. With less number of parameters, our
modeloutperformedtheexistingbestsentence
encoding-basedapproachbya largemargin.
1 Introduction
Given a pair of sentences, the goal of recogniz-
ing text entailment (RTE) is to determine whether
the hypothesis can reasonably be inferred from the
premises. TherewerethreetypesofrelationinRTE,
Entailment (inferred to be true), Contradiction (in-
ferred to be false) and Neutral (truth unknown).A
few examples were given inTable 1.
Traditional methods to RTE has been the domin-
ion of classiﬁers employing hand engineered fea-
tures, which heavily relied on natural language pro-
cessing pipelines and external resources. Formal
reasoning methods (Bosand Markert, 2005) werePTheboyisrunningthroughagrassyarea.
Theboyisinhisroom. C
HA boyis runningoutside. E
Theboyisina park. N
Table 1: Examples of three types of label in RTE, where P
stands for Premises andH stands for Hypothesis
also explored by many researchers, but not been
widely used because of its complexity and domain
limitations.
Recently published Stanford Natural Language
Inference (SNLI1) corpus makes it possible to use
deep learning methods to solve RTE problems.
So far proposed deep learning approaches can be
roughly categorized into two groups: sentence
encoding-based models and matching encoding-
basedmodels. Asthenameimplies, theencoding of
sentenceisthecoreofformermethods,whilethelat-
ter methods directly model therelation between two
sentences and didn’t generate sentence representa-
tions at all.
In view of universality, we focused our efforts on
sentence encoding-based model. Existing methods
ofthiskindincluding: LSTMs-basedmodel,GRUs-
based model, TBCNN-based model and SPINN-
based model. Single directional LSTMs and GRUs
suffer a weakness of not utilizing the contextual
information from the future tokens and Convolu-
tional Neural Networks didn’t make full use of in-
formation contained in word order. Bidirectional
LSTM utilizes both the previous and future context
by processing the sequence ontwo directions which
helps to address the drawbacks mentioned above.
1http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/snli/
P Multiplication HSoftMax Y
Difference 
BLSTM Mean Pooling 
BLSTM BLSTM BLSTM Sentence Vec 
BLSTM Mean Pooling 
BLSTM BLSTM BLSTM Sentence Vec Inter-Attention 
immersed pleasant photograph conversation involved headted discussion Canon 
Premise Hypothesis δAε
Sentence 
Input δBε
Sentence 
Encoding δCε
Sentence 
Matching 
② 
① 
Figure1: Architecture of Bidirectional LSTMmodel withInner-Atten tion
(Tanet al., 2015)
A recent work by (Rockt¨ aschel et al., 2015) im-
proved the performance by applying a neural atten-
tion model that didn’t yield sentence embeddings.
Inthispaper, weproposed auniﬁeddeeplearning
frameworkforrecognizing textual entailment which
dosenotrequire anyfeatureengineering, orexternal
resources. ThebasicmodelisbasedonbuildingbiL-
STM models on both premises and hypothesis. The
basicmeanpoolingencodercanroughlyformaintu-
ition about what this sentence is talking about. Ob-
tained this representation, we extended this model
by utilize an Inner-Attention mechanism on both
sides. Thismechanismhelpsgeneratemoreaccurate
and focused sentence representations for classiﬁca-
tion. In addition, we introduced a simple effective
input strategy thatget rideofsamewordsinhypoth-
esis and premise, which further boosts our perfor-
mance. Without parameter tuning, we improved the
art-of-the-state performance of sentence encoding-
based model bynearly 2%.
2 Ourapproach
In our work, we treated RTE task as a supervised
three-way classiﬁcation problem. The overall archi-
tecture of our model is shown in Figure 1. The de-
sign of this model we follow the idea of Siamese
Network, that the two identical sentence encodersshare the same set of weights during training, and
the two sentence representations then combined to-
gether to generated a ”relation vector” for classiﬁ-
cation. As we can see from the ﬁgure, the model
mainly consists of three parts. From top to bottom
were: (A).Thesentenceinputmodule; (B).Thesen-
tenceencoding module; (C).Thesentence matching
module. We will explain the last two parts in detail
in the following subsection. And the sentence input
module will beintroduced inSection 3.3.
2.1 SentenceEncodingModule
Sentence encoding module is the fundamental part
of this model. To generate better sentence repre-
sentations, we employed a two-step strategy to en-
code sentences. Firstly, average pooling layer was
built on top of word-level biLSTMs to produce sen-
tence vector. This simple encoder combined with
the sentence matching module formed the basic ar-
chitecture of our model. With much less parame-
ters,thisbasicmodelalonecanoutperformed art-of-
state method by a small margin. (refer to Table 3).
Secondly, attention mechanism was employed on
the same sentence, instead of using target sentence
representation to attend words in source sentence,
we used the representation generated in previous
stage to attend words appeared in the sentence it-
self,whichresultsinasimilardistributionwithother
attention mechanism weights. More attention was
given to important words.2
The idea of ”Inner-attention” was inspired by the
observation that when human read one sentence,
people usually can roughly form an intuition about
whichpartofthesentenceismoreimportantaccord-
ing past experience. And we implemented this idea
using attention mechanism in our model. The atten-
tion mechanism isformalized asfollows:
M=tanh(WyY+WhRave⊗eL)
α=softmax (wTM)
Ratt=YαT
whereYis a matrix consisting of output vectors
of biLSTM, Raveis the output of mean pooling
layer,αdenoted the attention vector and Rattis the
attention-weighted sentence representation.
2.2 SentenceMatchingModule
Once the sentence vectors are generated. Three
matching methods were applied to extract relations
between premise and hypothesis.
•Concatenation of the tworepresentations
•Element-wise product
•Element-wise difference
This matching architecture was ﬁrst used by
(Mou et al., 2015). Finally,weusedaSoftMaxlayer
overtheoutput ofanon-linear projectionofthegen-
erated matching vector for classiﬁcation.
3 Experiments
3.1 DataSet
To evaluate the performance of our model,
we conducted our experiments on Stanford
Natural Language Inference (SNLI) corpus
(Bosand Markert, 2005). At 570K pairs, SNLI
is two orders of magnitude larger than all other
resources of its type. The dataset is constructed
by crowdsourced efforts, each sentence written
by humans. The target labels comprise three
classes: Entailment, Contradiction, and Neutral
2Recently, (Yanget al.,2016) proposed a Hierarchical At-
tention model on the task of document classiﬁcation also use d
for but the target representation in attention their mechan ism is
randomly initialized.(two irrelevant sentences). We applied the standard
train/validation/test split, containing 550k, 10k, and
10k samples, respectively.
3.2 Parameter Setting
Thetraining objective of our model iscross-entropy
loss, and we use minibatch SGD with the Rmsprop
(Tieleman and Hinton, 2012) for optimization. The
batchsizeis128. Adropout layer wasappliedinthe
output of the network with the dropout rate set to
0.25. In our model, we used pretrained 300D Glove
840B vectors (Pennington et al., 2014) to initialize
the word embedding. Out-of-vocabulary words in
thetraining setarerandomly initialized bysampling
valuesuniformly from(0.05,0.05). Alloftheseem-
bedding are not updated during training . We didn’t
tunerepresentations ofwordsfor tworeasons: 1. To
reduced the number of parameters needed to train.
2. Keep their representation stays close to unseen
similar words in inference time, which improved
the model’s generation ability. The model is imple-
mented using open-source framework Keras.3
3.3 TheInputStrategy
Inthispart,weinvestigatedfourstrategiestomodify
theinputonourbasicmodelwhichhelpsusincrease
performance, the four strategies are:
•Inverting Premises (Sutskever et al., 2014)
•DoublingPremises(Zaremba and Sutskever, 2014)
•Doubling Hypothesis
•Differentiating Inputs (Removing same words
appeared inpremises and hypothesis)
Experimental results were illustrated in Table 2.
As we can see from it, doubling hypothesis and
differentiating inputs both improved our model’s
performance.While the hypothesises usually much
shorter than premises, doubling hypothesis may ab-
sorb this difference and emphasize the meaning
twice via this strategy. Differentiating input strat-
egy forces the model to focus on different part of
the two sentences which may help the classiﬁcation
for Neutral and Contradiction examples as we ob-
served that our model tended to assign unconﬁdent
instances to Entailment. And the original input sen-
tences appeared inFigure 1are:
Premise: Two man in polo shirts and tan pants im-
mersed inapleasantconversationaboutphotograph.
3http://keras.io/
InputStrategy Test Acc.
Original Sequences 83.24%
Inverting Premises 82.60%
Doubling Premises 83.66%
Doubling Hypothesis 82.83%
Differentiating Inputs 83.72%
Table2:Comparison of different input strategies
Hypothesis: Two manin poloshirts andtanpantsin-
volvedin aheateddiscussionaboutCanon.
Label:Contradiction
While most of the words in this pair of sentences
are same or close in semantic, It is hard for model
to distinguish the difference between them, which
resulted in labeling it with Neutral or Entailment.
Through differentiating inputs strategy, this kind of
problems can be solved.
3.4 Comparison Methods
In this part, wecompared our model against the fol-
lowing art-of-the-state baseline approaches:
•LSTM enc: 100D LSTM encoders + MLP.
(Bowmanet al.,2015)
•GRUenc: 1024DGRUencoders+skip-thoughts+
cat,-. (Vendrovet al.,2015)
•TBCNN enc: 300D Tree-based CNN encoders +
cat,◦, -. (Mouet al.,2015)
•SPINNenc: 300DSPINN-NPencoders+cat, ◦,-.
(Bowmanet al.,2016)
•Static-Attention: 100D LSTM + static attention.
(Rockt¨ aschelet al.,2015)
•WbW-Attention: 100DLSTM+word-by-wordat-
tention. (Rockt¨ aschelet al.,2015)
Thecatrefers to concatenation, -and◦denote
element-wise difference and product, respectively.
Much simpler and easy tounderstand.
3.5 ResultsandQualitative Analysis
Although the classiﬁcation of RTE example is not
solely relying on representations obtained from at-
tention, it is still instructive to analysis Inner-
Attention mechanism as we witnessed a large per-
formance increase after employing it. We hand-
picked several examples from the dataset to visual-
ize. In order to make the weights more discrimi-
nated, wedidn’t useauniform colour atlacross sen-
tences. That is, each sentence have its own color
atla, the lightest color and the darkest color de-
notedthesmallest attention weightthebiggest valueModel Params Test Acc.
Sentenceencoding-based models
LSTMenc 3.0M 80.6%
GRUenc 15M 81.4%
TBCNNenc 3.5M 82.1%
SPINNenc 3.7M 83.2%
Basic model 2.0M 83.3%
+Inner-Attention 2.8M 84.2%
+Diversing Input 2.8M 85.0%
Otherneural networkmodels
Static-Attention 242K 82.4%
WbW-Attention 252K 83.5%
Table3:PerformancecomparisonofdifferentmodelsonSNLI.
within the sentence, respectively. Visualizations of
Inner-Attention on these examples are depicted in
Figure 2.
A Two Three 
men women firefighter 
is climbing come 
riding on out 
a a of 
moto wooden subway 
scaffold station 
Figure2: Inner-AttentionVisualizations.
We observed that more attention was given to
Nones, Verbs and Adjectives. This conform to
our experience that these words are more semantic
richer than function words. While mean pooling re-
garded each word of equal importance, the attention
mechanismhelpsre-weightwordsaccordingtotheir
importance. And more focused and accurate sen-
tence representations were generated based on pro-
duced attention vectors.
4 Conclusionand Future work
In this paper, we proposed a bidirectional LSTM-
based model with Inner-Attention to solve the RTE
problem. We come up with an idea to utilize
attention mechanism within sentence which can
teach itself to attend words without the information
from another one. The Inner-Attention mechanism
helps produce more accurate sentence representa-
tions through attention vectors. Inaddition, thesim-
ple effective diversing input strategy introduced by
us further boosts our results. And this model can be
easily adapted to other sentence-matching models.
Our future work including:
1. Employ this architecture on other sentence-
matchingtaskssuchasQuestionAnswer,Para-
phrase and Sentence TextSimilarity etc.
2. Trymoreheuristics matching methods tomake
full use of the sentence vectors.
Acknowledgments
We thank all anonymous reviewers for their hard
work!
References
[BosandMarkert2005] Johan Bos and Katja Markert.
2005. Recognising textual entailment with logical in-
ference. In Proceedings of the conference on Human
LanguageTechnologyandEmpiricalMethodsinNatu-
ralLanguageProcessing ,pages628–635.Association
forComputationalLinguistics.
[Bowmanetal.2015] Samuel R Bowman, Gabor Angeli,
ChristopherPotts, and ChristopherD Manning. 2015.
Alargeannotatedcorpusforlearningnaturallanguage
inference. arXiv preprintarXiv:1508.05326 .
[Bowmanetal.2016] Samuel R Bowman, Jon Gauthier,
AbhinavRastogi, Raghav Gupta, ChristopherD Man-
ning, and Christopher Potts. 2016. A fast uniﬁed
model for parsing and sentence understanding. arXiv
preprintarXiv:1603.06021 .
[Mouetal.2015] Lili Mou, Men Rui, Ge Li, Yan Xu,
Lu Zhang, Rui Yan, and Zhi Jin. 2015. Recogniz-
ing entailment and contradictionby tree-basedconvo-
lution.arXiv preprintarXiv:1512.08422 .
[Penningtonet al.2014] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard
Socher, and Christopher D Manning. 2014. Glove:
Global vectors for word representation. In EMNLP,
volume14,pages1532–1543.
[Rockt¨ ascheletal.2015] Tim Rockt¨ aschel, Edward
Grefenstette, Karl Moritz Hermann, Tom´ aˇ s Koˇ cisk` y,
and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Reasoning about en-
tailment with neural attention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.06664 .
[Sutskeveret al.2014] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and
QuocVLe. 2014. Sequencetosequencelearningwith
neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processingsystems , pages3104–3112.[Tanet al.2015] Ming Tan, Bing Xiang, and Bowen
Zhou. 2015. Lstm-based deep learning models
for non-factoid answer selection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.04108 .
[TielemanandHinton2012] Tijmen Tieleman and Geof-
frey Hinton. 2012. Lecture 6.5-rmsprop. COURS-
ERA:Neural networksformachinelearning .
[Vendrovet al.2015] Ivan Vendrov, Ryan Kiros, Sanja
Fidler, and Raquel Urtasun. 2015. Order-
embeddings of images and language. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06361 .
[Yanget al.2016] Zichao Yang, Diyi Yang, Chris Dyer,
Xiaodong He, Alex Smola, and Eduard Hovy. 2016.
Hierarchical attention networksfor documentclassiﬁ-
cation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies.
[ZarembaandSutskever2014] Wojciech Zaremba and
Ilya Sutskever. 2014. Learning to execute. arXiv
preprintarXiv:1410.4615 .