Title: Question and Answer Test-Train Overlap in Open-Domain Question Answering Datasets

arXiv:2008.02637v1  [cs.CL]  6 Aug 2020Question and Answer Test-Train Overlap in Open-Domain Ques tion
Answering Datasets
Patrick Lewis†‡, Pontus Stenetorp‡, Sebastian Riedel†‡
†Facebook AI Research;‡University College London
plewis@fb.com
Abstract
Ideally Open-Domain Question Answering
models should exhibit a number of competen-
cies, ranging from simply memorizing ques-
tions seen at training time, to answering novel
question formulations with answers seen dur-
ing training, to generalizing to completely
novel questions with novel answers. However,
single aggregated test set scores do not show
the full picture of what capabilities models
truly have. In this work, we perform a de-
tailed study of the test sets of three popular
open-domain benchmark datasets with respect
to these competencies. We ﬁnd that 60-70% of
test-time answers are also present somewhere
in the training sets. We also ﬁnd that 30% of
test-set questions have a near-duplicate para-
phrase in their corresponding training sets. Us-
ing these ﬁndings, we evaluate a variety of pop-
ular open-domain models to obtain greater in-
sight into what extent they can actually gen-
eralize, and what drives their overall perfor-
mance. We ﬁnd that all models perform dra-
matically worse on questions that cannot be
memorized from training sets, with a mean ab-
solute performance difference of 63% between
repeated and non-repeated data. Finally we
show that simple nearest-neighbor models out-
perform a BART closed-book QA model, fur-
ther highlighting the role that training set mem-
orization plays in these benchmarks.
1 Introduction
Open-domain Question Answering (ODQA) is a
task examining the ability of models to produce an-
swers to natural language factoid questions drawn
from an open set of domains. ODQA has received
signiﬁcant attention for its potential practical ap-
plications, and more recently as a popular method
to analyse how well NLP systems can capture and
recall factual knowledge. This interest in ODQA
as a challenging “knowledge-intensive” task has
led to a ﬂurry of recent works that have driventest-set performance on standard ODQA datasets
to new heights ( Lee et al. ,2019 ;Guu et al. ,2020 ;
Karpukhin et al. ,2020 ;Lewis et al. ,2020 ;Izacard
and Grave ,2020 , inter alia). However, a deeper un-
derstanding of what kinds of questions our models
can answer well has been less forthcoming. Whilst
there have been several works examining other
kinds of QA datasets ( Manjunatha et al. ,2018 ;
Kaushik and Lipton ,2018 ;Sugawara et al. ,2018 ,
2020 ), we know comparatively little about how
the questions and answers are distributed in these
ODQA benchmarks, making it hard to understand
and contextualize the results we are observing.
In this work, we address these issues via an
analysis of the test sets of three popular ODQA
datasets, namely WebQuestions ( Berant et al. ,
2013 ), TriviaQA ( Joshi et al. ,2017 ) and Open
Natural Questions ( Kwiatkowski et al. ,2019 ;Lee
et al. ,2019 ). We identify three classes of question
that a trained ODQA system should be able to an-
swer, in increasing order of difﬁculty: 1) the most
basic behaviour is to be able to reliably recall the
answer to a question that the model has seen at
training time. 2) a model should be able to answer
novel questions at test time and choose an answer
from the set of answers it has seen during training.
3) a strong system should be able to answer novel
questions which have answers which are not con-
tained in the training data. It is not clear to what
extent our current ODQA datasets measure each of
these three behaviours. To address this, we stratify
the test sets of these datasets. Firstly, we split the
test data by whether answers in the test set also ap-
pear somewhere in the training sets. We ﬁnd that
58-71% of test answers also occur somewhere in
the training data, demonstrating that the majority
of the test data does not probe for answer general-
ization.
Secondly, we annotate 1000 question, answer
pairs from each test set for repeated questions in
Dataset% Answer
overlap% Question
overlap
Natural Questions 63.6 32.5
TriviaQA 71.7 33.6
WebQuestions 57.9 27.5
Table 1: Fractions of open-domain test sets that overlap
with their training sets.
their respective training sets. We ﬁnd that a sur-
prisingly high 28-34% have paraphrased questions
in the training data, the vast majority of which
are near-duplicates differing by one or two words.
This result implies that 30% of the test set of these
datasets only probe for how well models can sim-
ply memorize question answer pairs seen at train-
ing.
Equipped with these insights, we compute the
performance of several recently proposed ODQA
models on our test subsets. We test both
Open-book approaches, which leverage retrieval
from a large corpus of documents and Closed-
book approaches, which focus on training large
parametric models with no external knowledge
source ( Roberts et al. ,2020 ). We ﬁnd that test data
with train-overlapping data contribute the bulk of
the overall performance of all the models studied.
These issues seem to be more acute for closed-
book models. Strikingly, we ﬁnd that a closed-
book BART-based model ( Lewis et al. ,2019 ) is
incapable of producing answers not observed at
training time, and achieves very low scores on
non-overlapping questions, suggesting this model
is only capable of memorizing question, answer
pairs from training time. With this in mind, we
build simple nearest-neighbor models which out-
perform this BART model, despite having virtu-
ally no capacity to generalize beyond training data.
To summarize, we make the following contri-
butions: 1) We provide insights into how answer
entities are distributed between dataset splits for
ODQA datasets 2) We provide annotated subsets
of ODQA test sets indicating whether test-time
questions are duplicates of training time ques-
tions.13) We evaluate a variety of models on our
dataset splits, and derive insights into what kinds
of question answering behaviour different models
achieve.
1Our data and evaluation code will be made available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/QA-Overlap2 Datasets
In our analysis, we consider three widely used
Open-domain QA datasets, WebQuestions ( Berant
et al. ,2013 ), TriviaQA ( Joshi et al. ,2017 ), and
Open Natural Questions, a subset of Natural Ques-
tions ( Kwiatkowski et al. ,2019 ) introduced by Lee
et al. (2019 ). All three datasets consist of factual
natural language questions and short multi-token
answers, but differ slightly in the style of questions
and format of answers.
WebQuestions WebQuestions is a dataset of
3,778 train and 2,032 test question, answer pairs.
Questions were obtained by mining a search en-
gine, and answers are Freebase entities ( Bollacker
et al. ,2008 ) annotated by crowdworkers. The
ODQA task consists of predicting the name of
the freebase entity. We use the standard train/test
splits from Berant et al. (2013 ). We use the de-
velopment split used in Karpukhin et al. (2020 ),
which was randomly split from the train set.
TriviaQA TriviaQA is a dataset of 78,785 train,
8,837 development and 11,313 test question, an-
swer pairs obtained by scraping trivia websites.
Answers consist of wikipedia entities, and any
alias for the answer entity is considered a correct
answer. We use the open-domain train/test splits,
which corresponding to the unﬁltered-train and
unﬁltered-dev reading comprehension splits ( Lee
et al. ,2019 ;Min et al. ,2019 ,2020 ;Karpukhin
et al. ,2020 ).
Open-Natural Questions Natural Questions
consists of search engine questions with answers
annotated as spans in wikipedia articles by crowd-
workers. The open-domain version of the dataset
consists of question, answer pairs from Natural
Questions which have short answer spans less than
6 tokens in length. We use the standard open-
domain splits in our experiments, consisting of
79,168 train, 8,757 development and 3,610 ques-
tion answer pairs.
For all three datasets, the canonical train, devel-
opment and test splits were obtained by randomly
splitting the question, answer pairs, and there are
no exact duplicate questions in any dataset. We ex-
clude development data from our overlap analyses,
and focus purely on train-test overlap to explicitly
assess the effects of training memorization.
3 Test-Train Overlaps
We explore two ways of examining the test sets
based on overlaps between training and test data.
Consider a question, answer pair (q,a)from the
test setDtestwhere the answer consists of at least
one answer reference a={s1..sn}. We can con-
sider answer overlap where there exists at least
one(q′,a′)∈Dtrainwhich shares at least one
answer reference with (q,a). We can also con-
sider question overlap , where there exists some
(q′′,a′′)∈Dtrainwhereq′′is a duplicate of q,
such that qandq′′are paraphrases and have the
same answer.
Answer Overlap Following Rajpurkar et al.
(2016 ), we apply answer normalization2on an-
swer references before searching for overlapping
answer references for all (q,a)pairs in the test
set – see Table 1. We ﬁnd that 58% of test (q,a)
pairs in WebQuestions have answer overlaps, with
63.6% and 71.7% for Natural Questions and Trivi-
aQA respectively. We would naturally expect Triv-
iaQA to have higher answer overlap as it has more
answer references per question on average (13.7
references on average compared to 1.2 for Natural
Questions and 2.4 for WebQuestions). Examples
of answer overlaps are shown in Table 2.
Question-Overlap Unlike answer overlap, ques-
tion overlap cannot be easily computed automati-
cally, as searching for duplicates via rules or para-
phrase classiﬁers may lead to both false positives
and negatives. Thus, we turn to manual anno-
tation to investigate question overlap. To obtain
a representative sample for each dataset, we an-
notate a random subset of 1,000 (q,a)pairs for
each test set. Annotators are shown a list of up
to 50 training questions which have a similar an-
swer reference.3This answer similarity function
is designed for high recall to obtain a tight lower
bound on question overlap. If there were no ques-
tions with similar answers in the training set, the
question was automatically annotated as not over-
2Answer normalization consists of lower-casing, strip-
ping punctuation, removing articles and normalizing white s-
pace
3Training questions are selected for annotation if one of
the following is true: they share an answer reference with a
test question, a test answer reference is a sub-sequence of a
training answer reference, or the other way around (a train-
ing reference answer is a sub-sequence of a test answer ref-
erence). If there are more than 50 such questions, the top 50
are chosen by the highest degree of word overlap to the test
question.lapping. Three expert annotators looked through
these similar questions and indicated if any were
paraphrases of the test question and had the same
answer.
The results from the annotation can be seen
in Table 1shows these results and examples of
overlapping questions in Table 3. A sample
of 100 2-way annotated examples indicated 93%
agreement, corresponding to a Cohen’s Kappa of
0.85 ( Cohen ,1960 ). What we observe is a high
degree of question overlap, with between 27.5 and
33.6% of the 1,000 annotated test questions had
a duplicate in the training set. It is also common
to see several duplicates per test question, with an
average of 2.8 duplicate questions per overlapping
test question in Natural Questions.
4 Implications for Modelling
Given our ﬁndings from above, we turn our atten-
tion to how well ODQA models perform with re-
spect to train-test set overlap. Earlier, we identi-
ﬁed three classes of answering behaviors: 1) ques-
tions that can be memorized at training time, 2)
novel questions that can be answered with answers
memorized at training time, 3) novel questions
with novel answers. We refer to these behaviours
asQuestion memorization ,Answer classiﬁcation
andQA generalization respectively.
Question memorization To perform well on the
question overlap subset, a model would only need
to be able to memorize (q,a)pairs at training time,
then recognize which training question matches a
test-time question. The reasoning required ranges
from trivial duplicate detection for very similar
questions such as “who played pink in pink ﬂoyd
the wall” and “who played pink in the movie
the wall”, to more challenging inference problems
for more subtle duplicates such as “On which is-
land in the North Sea did both St Aidan and St
Cuthbert live?” and “irish born missionary saint
aidan founded a monastery in 653 on which en-
glish island which is also the name of a 1970s uk
folk-rock band?”. A manual annotation of 100
question-overlap pairs indicated that 81% were
simple duplicates differing by one or two words,
14% required some paraphrasing recognition ca-
pability, and 5% required more sophisticated nat-
ural language understanding. To measure perfor-
mance on question memorization, we build a test
subset comprised of (q,a)pairs which have ques-
tion overlap to the training set.
Open Natural Questions TriviaQA WebQuestions
Overlapping Non-overlapping Overlapping Non-overlapping Overlapping Non-overlapping
Phil Simms Cloves David Bowie Death in the afternoon Harvard Queen Victoria
Brian Johnson Matt Monro Battle of camlann Clash of the Titans Alderaan Braslia
8 1,020 – 1,080 kg Heligoland ice-cream sundae India Paddington
the Indians Hermann Ebbinghaus Henry VII Camshaft 2011 Tom Corbett
the 1830s Matt Flinders Niagra Falls Cumberland Zeus Gary
Table 2: Randomly sampled overlapping and non-overlapping answers from all three test sets.
Answer Test Question Train Question
Jason Marsden who plays max voice in a goofy movie who does max voice in a goofy movie
January 23 2018 when will the 2018 oscar nominations be annou nced when are the oscar nominations for 2018 announced
Alan Shearer who has scored more goals in the premier league m ost goals scored by a premier league player
retina where are the cones in the eye located where are cone ce lls located in the eye
francisco pizarro who led the conquest of the incas in south a merica conquistador who defeated the incan empire in peru
Table 3: Randomly sampled test-train overlapping question s in Open Natural Questions. See Appendix A.1for
more examples, including examples from TriviaQA and WebQue stions
Answer Classiﬁcation In order to tackle the
answer-overlap question, a multi-class classiﬁer
over training set answers would be sufﬁcient, as
answers never appear at test time that don’t appear
at training time. We build a test subset of (q,a)
pairs which have answer overlap, but do not have
question overlap. Question-overlap pairs are ex-
cluded to isolate performance on answer classiﬁ-
cation, since question-overlap questions are signif-
icantly easier to answer, and would inﬂate scores.
QA Generalization In this regime, models can-
not rely on memorizing their training data. To
measure performance on this most challenging
split, we build a test subset of (q,a)pairs which
do not have answer overlap with the training set.
We further note that we expect higher frequency
answers, such as countries, integers and public ﬁg-
ures would naturally be expected to appear less of-
ten in this test subset. As such, models that per-
form well on the head of the answer distribution
may struggle to perform well in this setting, de-
spite being able to perform some generalization at
test time.
In the following, we brieﬂy describe the models
included in our analysis. For published models,
we obtain test set predictions directly from the au-
thors.
4.1 Open-Book Models
Open-book Models are ODQA models which ﬁrst
retrieve relevant documents from Wikipedia and
then either extract or generate answers condi-
tioned on those documents. We consider theDense Passage Retrieval (DPR) model ( Karpukhin
et al. ,2020 ), a pipeline model which retrieves
documents based on dense embeddings, before
feeding them into a conventional reader-reranker
which extracts spans of text as answers. We also
include Retrieval-Augmented Generation ( Lewis
et al. ,2020 ), a recent model that jointly learns to
retrieve and generate answers in seq2seq frame-
work, based on dense retrieval and BART ( Lewis
et al. ,2019 ). Finally we include the state-of-the-
art Fusion-in-Decoder (FID) ( Izacard and Grave ,
2020 ), a pipeline model based on T5-large ( Raffel
et al. ,2020 ) which retrieves 100 documents and
fuses them so that the decoder can attend to all
documents at once. We not include FID results on
WebQuestions as the authors did not use it in their
original work.
4.2 Closed-Book Models
Closed-book models store the knowledge required
to answer their questions entirely within the pa-
rameters of the model itself, rather than in an
external corpus. Typically these models consist
of seq2seq transformer models which are directly
ﬁne-tuned on (q,a)pairs. In our analysis, we
train a BART-large closed-book QA model, which
is trained with questions as input and generates
(q,a)pairs as output. Checkpoints are selected
by Exact Match score on a development set. We
also include a much more powerful T5-11B model
from Roberts et al. (2020 ). We use the T5-
11B model which has been pretrained with a spe-
cial “Salient Span Masking” objective ( Guu et al. ,
2020 ), designed to improve downstream ODQA
ModelOpen Natural Questions TriviaQA WebQuestions
TotalQuestion
OverlapAnswer
Overlap
OnlyNo
OverlapTotalQuestion
OverlapAnswer
Overlap
OnlyNo
OverlapTotalQuestion
OverlapAnswer
Overlap
OnlyNo
Overlap
Open
bookRAG 44.5 70.7 34.9 24.8 56.8 82.7 54.7 29.2 45.5 81.0 45.8 21.1
DPR 41.3 69.4 34.6 19.3 57.9 80.4 59.6 31.6 42.4 74.1 39.8 22.2
FID 51.4 71.3 48.3 34.5 67.6 87.5 66.9 42.8 - - - -
Closed
bookT5-11B+SSM 36.6 77.2 22.2 9.4 - - - - 44.7 82.1 44.5 22.0
BART 26.5 67.6 10.2 0.8 26.7 67.3 16.3 0.8 27.4 71.5 20.7 1.6
Nearest
NeighborDense 26.7 69.4 7.0 0.0 28.9 81.5 11.2 0.0 26.4 78.8 17.1 0.0
TF-IDF 22.2 56.8 4.1 0.0 23.5 68.8 5.1 0.0 19.4 63.9 8.7 0.0
Table 4: Exact Match scores for several recent models on our d ataset splits. The “Total” column is the overall
performance on the dataset. “Question Overlap” refers to th e test subset with train-test question overlap, and
probes for simple question memorization. “Answer Overlap O nly” refers to the test subset without train-test
question overlap, but with train-test answer overlap, whic h probes for answer classiﬁcation. “No overlap” refers to
the test subset with no train-test answer overlap and probes for QA generalization
performance. The T5-11B model was trained on
both train and development portions of the data,
and thus has seen ∼10% more training data than
other models. As we did not include development
data in our overlap analysis, a small amount of
unaccounted-for overlap is possible for this model.
We do not include TriviaQA results for the T5
model since this model was trained using a differ-
ent TriviaQA data splitting scheme.
4.3 Nearest-Neighbor Models
Given that there are high levels of train-test over-
laps in these datasets, we also experiment with
some simple nearest-neighbor models. Here, we
simply retrieve a (q,a)pair from the training set
based on question similarity to the test question,
and return its answer. We experiment with two
models, one using TF-IDF and the other using
the dot product similarity of question embeddings
from the DPR retriever. These models cannot
generalize to non-overlapping answers, and have
limited capacity to answer non-overlapping ques-
tions. However, these models are attractive from
the perspective of model size and efﬁciency. There
has recently been a push towards more space and
memory-efﬁcient QA systems.4Lightweight re-
trievers coupled with a database of carefully se-
lected(q,a)pairs would represent a very space-
efﬁcient solution compared to open-book models
which must retrieve from large textual corpora, or
closed-book models with large parameter counts.
4Such as the EfﬁcientQA competition at Neurips 2020
https://efficientqa.github.io/4.4 Results
Table 4shows our results. In this section we un-
pack some ﬁndings.
Question Memorization Earlier, we found that
∼30% of test set questions overlap with the train-
ing set. The “Question overlap” columns in Ta-
ble4shows performance on Question Memoriza-
tion. Comparing this column with the total perfor-
mance column shows that all models perform sig-
niﬁcantly higher on memorizable questions. This
ﬁnding is not surprising, but it is worth highlight-
ing that a signiﬁcant proportion of overall perfor-
mance is driven by question memorization. This
effect is most pronounced for closed book models.
The T5-11B performs especially well for question
memorization on both Natural Questions and We-
bQuestions. This suggests that its very large ca-
pacity, coupled with more powerful question un-
derstanding may allow it to store, recognise and re-
call training questions more effectively than other
models.
Answer Classiﬁcation The “Answer overlap
only” column in Table 4shows performance on
answer classiﬁcation. Answer classiﬁcation has a
large drop in performance compared to question
memorization, dropping by an average of 45% Ex-
act Match score. Open-book models handle this
setting better than closed book models. The BART
model in particular struggles here, only managing
10.2% accuracy on this set.
QA Generalization The “No overlap” column
in Table 4shows performance on QA generaliza-
tion. All models suffer signiﬁcant performance
degradation on QA generalization, highlighting
the shortcomings of the overall performance met-
ric. For example, we may expect the FID state-
of-the model to answer half of Natural Questions-
style questions correctly, but once we have ac-
counted for repeated questions and answers, it can
only answer about one third of questions correctly.
This difference is even more pronounced for other
models, with an average absolute drop of 25%
with respect to overall performance.
Nearest-Neighbor Models The bottom two
rows of Table 4show the results of our nearest-
neighbor models. The TF-IDF model, despite be-
ing completely untrained, is able to answer about
20% of test questions correctly, purely by retriev-
ing questions from the training sets. More interest-
ingly, the dense retrieval model outperforms the
BART open-domain QA model on Natural Ques-
tions and TriviaQA. Furthermore, the dense near-
est neighbor model also outperforms the signiﬁ-
cantly more complex DPR open-book model on
TriviaQA and WebQuestions on the question over-
lap subset. These models have limitations, but
represent very space and memory efﬁcient solu-
tions. Our dense nearest neighbour model con-
sists of a single BERT-base checkpoint and out-
performs a BART-large model, and could be com-
pressed using quantization and distillation tech-
niques ( Sanh et al. ,2020 ;Jiao et al. ,2019 ). The
TF-IDF model is even smaller and could be imple-
mented extremely efﬁciently with negligible mem-
ory footprint.
5 Related Work
The widespread adoption of deep learning in the
last few years has been accompanied with an in-
crease in dataset sizes and construction method-
ologies. Examining what kinds of behaviours are
learnt by models has received attention in natural
langauge understanding tasks, such as the GLUE
benchmark ( Wang et al. ,2018 ), which includes a
diagnostic test set probing for different reasoning
types. Various works have also performed criti-
cal and careful analysis of question answering sys-
tems and datasets. Chen et al. (2016 ) closely ex-
amine the difﬁculty of the CNN-DM dataset ( Her-
mann et al. ,2015 ),Sugawara et al. (2020 ) perform
an analysis of machine comprehension dataset dif-
ﬁculty, Kaushik and Lipton (2018 ) analyse the dif-
ﬁculty of various machine reading datasets, and
Manjunatha et al. (2018 ) show that visual question
answering models memorize common question-answer relationships present in training data. Fvry
et al. (2020 ) perform an analysis of various closed-
book models’ TriviaQA predictions, based on en-
tity mentions. Kwiatkowski et al. (2019 ) note that
the machine reading Natural Questions dataset
has substantial train-test overlap of wikipedia ti-
tles, and provide some baselines for “long-answer”
QA. Closest to our work, Verga et al. (2020 ) ob-
serve similar answer overlap in knowledge-base
QA, and explore results on non-overlapping sub-
sets.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we performed a novel analysis of
popular open-domain question answering datasets.
We found that 60% of test set answers overlap with
the training set and, more surprisingly, 30% of test
set questions have at least one duplicate in the train
set. Following these observations, we contextual-
ize the performance of seven ODQA models, strat-
ifying by different amounts of training set overlap,
gaining an insight into to what extent these mod-
els generalize or simply memorize their training
data. It is clear that performance on these datasets
cannot be properly understood by overall QA accu-
racy and suggest that in future, a greater emphasis
should be placed on more behaviour-driven evalu-
ation, rather than pursuing single-number overall
accuracy ﬁgures.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank thank Nicola
De Cao, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins,
Kenton Lee, Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, Scott
Yih, Sewon Min, Gautier Izacard and Vladimir
Karpuhkin for helpful discussions and providing
test set prediction ﬁles for analysis.
References
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy
Liang. 2013. Semantic Parsing on Freebase from
Question-Answer Pairs . InProceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 1533–1544, Seattle, Wash-
ington, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim
Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: a collab-
oratively created graph database for structuring hu-
man knowledge . In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
SIGMOD international conference on Management
of data , SIGMOD ’08, pages 1247–1250, Vancou-
ver, Canada. Association for Computing Machinery.
Danqi Chen, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2016. A Thorough Examination of the
CNN/Daily Mail Reading Comprehension Task . In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 2358–2367, Berlin, Germany.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coefﬁcient of Agreement for
Nominal Scales .Educational and Psychological
Measurement , 20(1):37–46. Publisher: SAGE Pub-
lications Inc.
Thibault Fvry, Livio Baldini Soares, Nicholas FitzGer-
ald, Eunsol Choi, and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2020. En-
tities as Experts: Sparse Memory Access with En-
tity Supervision .arXiv:2004.07202 [cs] . ArXiv:
2004.07202.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pa-
supat, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2020. REALM: Re-
trieval-Augmented Language Model Pre-Training .
arXiv:2002.08909 [cs] . ArXiv: 2002.08909.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefen-
stette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Suley-
man, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching Machines
to Read and Comprehend . In C. Cortes, N. D.
Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Gar-
nett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 28 , pages 1693–1701. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2020. Leveraging
Passage Retrieval with Generative Models for Open
Domain Question Answering .arXiv:2007.01282
[cs]. ArXiv: 2007.01282.
Xiaoqi Jiao, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang,
Xiao Chen, Linlin Li, Fang Wang, and Qun Liu.
2019. TinyBERT: Distilling BERT for Natural
Language Understanding .arXiv:1909.10351 [cs] .
ArXiv: 1909.10351.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A Large Scale Dis-
tantly Supervised Challenge Dataset for Reading
Comprehension . InProceedings of the 55th AnnualMeeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1601–1611,
Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Ouz, Sewon Min, Patrick
Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen,
and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense Passage Re-
trieval for Open-Domain Question Answering .
arXiv:2004.04906 [cs] . ArXiv: 2004.04906.
Divyansh Kaushik and Zachary C. Lipton. 2018. How
Much Reading Does Reading Comprehension Re-
quire? A Critical Investigation of Popular Bench-
marks . In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 5010–5015, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-
ﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti,
Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Matthew Kelcey,
Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina N. Toutanova,
Llion Jones, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew Dai, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019. Natu-
ral Questions: a Benchmark for Question Answering
Research .Transactions of the Association of Com-
putational Linguistics .
Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, and Kristina Toutanova.
2019. Latent Retrieval for Weakly Supervised Open
Domain Question Answering . InProceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 6086–6096, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019.
BART: Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-train-
ing for Natural Language Generation, Translation,
and Comprehension .arXiv:1910.13461 [cs, stat] .
ArXiv: 1910.13461.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandara Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-
rich Kttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-
tschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-In-
tensive NLP Tasks .arXiv:2005.11401 [cs] . ArXiv:
2005.11401.
Varun Manjunatha, Nirat Saini, and Larry S. Davis.
2018. Explicit Bias Discovery in Visual Question
Answering Models .arXiv:1811.07789 [cs] . ArXiv:
1811.07789.
Sewon Min, Danqi Chen, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. A Discrete Hard EM Ap-
proach for Weakly Supervised Question Answering .
InProceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2851–
2864, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Sewon Min, Danqi Chen, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Han-
naneh Hajishirzi. 2020. Knowledge Guided Text
Retrieval and Reading for Open Domain Ques-
tion Answering .arXiv:1911.03868 [cs] . ArXiv:
1911.03868.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Kather-
ine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring
the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Uniﬁed Text–
to-Text Transformer .Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 21(140):1–67.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions
for Machine Comprehension of Text . In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pages 2383–2392,
Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. 2020.
How Much Knowledge Can You Pack Into the Pa-
rameters of a Language Model? arXiv:2002.08910
[cs, stat] . ArXiv: 2002.08910.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2020. DistilBERT, a distilled ver-
sion of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter .
arXiv:1910.01108 [cs] . ArXiv: 1910.01108.
Saku Sugawara, Kentaro Inui, Satoshi Sekine, and
Akiko Aizawa. 2018. What Makes Reading Com-
prehension Questions Easier? InProceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing , pages 4208–4219, Brus-
sels, Belgium. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Saku Sugawara, Pontus Stenetorp, Kentaro Inui, and
Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Assessing the Benchmark-
ing Capacity of Machine Reading Comprehension
Datasets . In The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-
Second Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Conference, IAAI 2020, The Tenth AAAI Sym-
posium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA, February
7-12, 2020 , pages 8918–8927. AAAI Press.
Pat Verga, Haitian Sun, Livio Baldini Soares, and
William W. Cohen. 2020. Facts as Experts: Adapt-
able and Interpretable Neural Memory over Sym-
bolic Knowledge .arXiv:2007.00849 [cs] . ArXiv:
2007.00849.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Fe-
lix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018.
GLUE: A Multi-Task Benchmark and Analysis Plat-
form for Natural Language Understanding . In
Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop Black-
boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
works for NLP , pages 353–355, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.A Appendices
A.1 Additional Question Overlap Examples
Tables 5,6and7give more question overlap ex-
amples for the three datasets.
Answer Test Question Train Question
Bob Geldof who played pink in pink ﬂoyd the wall who played pin k in the movie the wall
Daren Maxwell Kaga-
soffwho played ricky in secret life of the american teenager who p layed ricky on the secret life of the american teenager
Andy who does april end up with on parks and rec who does april m arry in parks and rec
may 5 2017 when did gaurdians of the galaxy 2 come out when is gu ardians of the galaxy vol 2 released
norman pritchard who won the ﬁrst medal in olympics for india who won the ﬁrst individual olympic medal for india
moira kelly who does the voice of nala in the lion king who play ed nala in the lion king movie
supreme court who enforces the charter of rights and freedom s who has ﬁnal authority of interpretation of the canadian
charter of rights and freedoms
554 most passing yards by nﬂ qb in a game what is the nﬂ record fo r most passing yards in a single
game
John Ross who ran the fastest 40 yard dash in the nﬂ who has the f astest 40 yard dash ever
international border ib what is the name of india pakistan bo rder what is the border name between india and pakistan
Andrew Wright who wrote when a man loves a woman who wrote song when a man loves a woman
new england patriots who has participated in the most super b owls what nﬂ team has been to most super bowls
Table 5: Additional examples of test-train overlapping que stions in Open Natural Questions
Answer Test Question Train Question
Picasso Who painted ”Boy With a Pipe” which, in May 2004,
was sold for a record price of $104 million?painted in 1905, the painting garcon a la pipe was a famous
painting by which famous artist who died in 1973?
Wensum On what river is the city of Norwich the english city of norwich lies on which river?
Mantle Comprising around two-thirds of the Earth’s mass ,
what is found between the core of the Earth and its
crust?what do we call the layer of the earth between its crust and
its core?
Live and Let Die In which James Bond ﬁlm does actress Jane Seym our
play Solitaire?jane seymour played the character ”solitaire” in which bond
ﬁlm?
Esau Who, in the Bible, was the eldest son of Isaac? in the bibl e, who was the ﬁrst born of isaac?
Alanis Morrisette Who made the 1995 album ’Jagged Little Pil l’ which
sold 33 million copies?who released the 1995 hit album ”jagged little pill”?
Excalibur In British legend, what is the name of King Arthurs
sword?what was the name of king arthur’s sword?
Humidity What is measured by a Hygrometer? what does a hygrom eter measure?
A Storm On the Beaufort scale what is deﬁned as force 11? what i s force 11 (eleven) on the beaufort scale?
Jeremy Irons Actress Sinead Cusack is married to which ’Osca r’
winning actor?which actor is the husband of sinead cusack?
Sir Cloudesley Shovell Who was the British Admiral who died i n 1707 when
four of his ships were wrecked in the Scilly Isles?in 1707 a ﬂeet of navy ships was wrecked off the scilly is-
lands. who was the commander who lost his life in the dis-
aster?
Tony Hart Which famous individual created the ’Blue Peter’ s ail-
ing ship logo?which artist designed the logo for uk television childrens
show blue peter?
Table 6: Examples of test-train overlapping questions in Tr iviaQA
Answer Test Question Train Question
costa rica where is isthmus of panama located on the map? wher e is isthmus of panama located?
1986 world series when’s the last time the mets won the world s eries? when did the mets win the pennant?
abbottabad where was bin laden found and killed? what countr y was osama bin laden killed in?
believer what other movies has ryan gosling been in? what mov ies does ryan gosling star in?
sculpture what type of art did leonardo da vinci make? what ki nd of art did leonardo da vinci produce?
origin of species what book did charles darwin wrote in 1859? what was the name of the book that charles darwin wrote?
morehouse college what college did martin luther king jr go t o? where did dr. martin luther king jr. go to school?
communist state what type of government did soviet union hav e? what type of government does the former soviet union have?
turkish lira what money to take to turkey? what currency to ta ke to side turkey?
spanish language what is the most common language spoken in a r-
gentina?what is language in argentina?
opera OR classical mu-
sicwhat music period did beethoven live in? what music did beeth oven composed?
harry s truman who was president after franklin d. roosevelt ? who became president when roosevelt died in ofﬁce?
Table 7: Examples of test-train overlapping questions in We bQuestions