Title: NewsQA: A Machine Comprehension Dataset

NEWSQA: A M ACHINE COMPREHENSION DATASET
Adam TrischlerTong WangXingdi YuanJustin Harris
Alessandro Sordoni Philip Bachman Kaheer Suleman
{adam.trischler, tong.wang, eric.yuan, justin.harris,
alessandro.sordoni, phil.bachman, k.suleman}@maluuba.com
Maluuba Research
Montréal, Québec, Canada
ABSTRACT
We present NewsQA , a challenging machine comprehension dataset of over 100,000
human-generated question-answer pairs. Crowdworkers supply questions and an-
swers based on a set of over 10,000 news articles from CNN, with answers consist-
ing of spans of text from the corresponding articles. We collect this dataset through
a four-stage process designed to solicit exploratory questions that require reasoning.
A thorough analysis conﬁrms that NewsQA demands abilities beyond simple word
matching and recognizing textual entailment. We measure human performance
on the dataset and compare it to several strong neural models. The performance
gap between humans and machines (0.198 in F1) indicates that signiﬁcant progress
can be made on NewsQA through future research. The dataset is freely available at
https://datasets.maluuba.com/NewsQA .
1 I NTRODUCTION
Almost all human knowledge is recorded in the medium of text. As such, comprehension of written
language by machines, at a near-human level, would enable a broad class of artiﬁcial intelligence
applications. In human students we evaluate reading comprehension by posing questions based
on a text passage and then assessing a student’s answers. Such comprehension tests are appealing
because they are objectively gradable and may measure a range of important abilities, from basic
understanding to causal reasoning to inference (Richardson et al., 2013). To teach literacy to machines,
the research community has taken a similar approach with machine comprehension (MC).
Recent years have seen the release of a host of MC datasets. Generally, these consist of (document,
question, answer) triples to be used in a supervised learning framework. Existing datasets vary in size,
difﬁculty, and collection methodology; however, as pointed out by Rajpurkar et al. (2016), most suffer
from one of two shortcomings: those that are designed explicitly to test comprehension (Richardson
et al., 2013) are too small for training data-intensive deep learning models, while those that are
sufﬁciently large for deep learning (Hermann et al., 2015; Hill et al., 2016; Bajgar et al., 2016) are
generated synthetically, yielding questions that are not posed in natural language and that may not
test comprehension directly (Chen et al., 2016). More recently, Rajpurkar et al. (2016) sought to
overcome these deﬁciencies with their crowdsourced dataset, SQuAD .
Here we present a challenging new largescale dataset for machine comprehension: NewsQA .NewsQA
contains 119,633 natural language questions posed by crowdworkers on 12,744 news articles from
CNN. Answers to these questions consist of spans of text within the corresponding article highlighted
also by crowdworkers. To build NewsQA we utilized a four-stage collection process designed to
encourage exploratory, curiosity-based questions that reﬂect human information seeking. CNN
articles were chosen as the source material because they have been used in the past (Hermann et al.,
2015) and, in our view, machine comprehension systems are particularly suited to high-volume,
rapidly changing information sources like news.
These three authors contributed equally.
1arXiv:1611.09830v3  [cs.CL]  7 Feb 2017
As Trischler et al. (2016a), Chen et al. (2016), and others have argued, it is important for datasets
to be sufﬁciently challenging to teach models the abilities we wish them to learn. Thus, in line
with Richardson et al. (2013), our goal with NewsQA was to construct a corpus of questions that
necessitates reasoning-like behaviors – for example, synthesis of information across different parts of
an article. We designed our collection methodology explicitly to capture such questions.
The challenging characteristics of NewsQA that distinguish it from most previous comprehension
tasks are as follows:
1. Answers are spans of arbitrary length within an article, rather than single words or entities.
2. Some questions have no answer in the corresponding article (the nullspan).
3. There are no candidate answers from which to choose.
4.Our collection process encourages lexical and syntactic divergence between questions and
answers.
5.A signiﬁcant proportion of questions requires reasoning beyond simple word- and context-
matching (as shown in our analysis).
Some of these characteristics are present also in SQuAD , the MC dataset most similar to NewsQA .
However, we demonstrate through several metrics that NewsQA offers a greater challenge to existing
models.
In this paper we describe the collection methodology for NewsQA , provide a variety of statistics
to characterize it and contrast it with previous datasets, and assess its difﬁculty. In particular, we
measure human performance and compare it to that of two strong neural-network baselines. Humans
signiﬁcantly outperform powerful question-answering models. This suggests there is room for
improvement through further advances in machine comprehension research.
2 R ELATED DATASETS
NewsQA follows in the tradition of several recent comprehension datasets. These vary in size,
difﬁculty, and collection methodology, and each has its own distinguishing characteristics. We agree
with Bajgar et al. (2016) who have said “models could certainly beneﬁt from as diverse a collection
of datasets as possible.” We discuss this collection below.
2.1 MCT EST
MCTest (Richardson et al., 2013) is a crowdsourced collection of 660 elementary-level children’s
stories with associated questions and answers. The stories are ﬁctional, to ensure that the answer must
be found in the text itself, and carefully limited to what a young child can understand. Each question
comes with a set of 4 candidate answers that range from single words to full explanatory sentences.
The questions are designed to require rudimentary reasoning and synthesis of information across
sentences, making the dataset quite challenging. This is compounded by the dataset’s size, which
limits the training of expressive statistical models. Nevertheless, recent comprehension models have
performed well on MCTest (Sachan et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015), including a highly structured
neural model (Trischler et al., 2016a). These models all rely on access to the small set of candidate
answers, a crutch that NewsQA does not provide.
2.2 CNN/D AILY MAIL
TheCNN/Daily Mail corpus (Hermann et al., 2015) consists of news articles scraped from those
outlets with corresponding cloze-style questions. Cloze questions are constructed synthetically
by deleting a single entity from abstractive summary points that accompany each article (written
presumably by human authors). As such, determining the correct answer relies mostly on recognizing
textual entailment between the article and the question. The named entities within an article are
identiﬁed and anonymized in a preprocessing step and constitute the set of candidate answers; contrast
this with NewsQA in which answers often include longer phrases and no candidates are given.
Because the cloze process is automatic, it is straightforward to collect a signiﬁcant amount of data
to support deep-learning approaches: CNN/Daily Mail contains about 1.4 million question-answer
2
pairs. However, Chen et al. (2016) demonstrated that the task requires only limited reasoning and, in
fact, performance of the strongest models (Kadlec et al., 2016; Trischler et al., 2016b; Sordoni et al.,
2016) nearly matches that of humans.
2.3 C HILDREN ’SBOOK TEST
TheChildren’s Book Test (CBT ) (Hill et al., 2016) was collected using a process similar to that of
CNN/Daily Mail . Text passages are 20-sentence excerpts from children’s books available through
Project Gutenberg; questions are generated by deleting a single word in the next ( i.e., 21st) sentence.
Consequently, CBT evaluates word prediction based on context. It is a comprehension task insofar as
comprehension is likely necessary for this prediction, but comprehension may be insufﬁcient and
other mechanisms may be more important.
2.4 B OOK TEST
Bajgar et al. (2016) convincingly argue that, because existing datasets are not large enough, we have
yet to reach the full capacity of existing comprehension models. As a remedy they present BookTest .
This is an extension to the named-entity and common-noun strata of CBT that increases their size
by over 60 times. Bajgar et al. (2016) demonstrate that training on the augmented dataset yields a
model (Kadlec et al., 2016) that matches human performance on CBT. This is impressive and suggests
that much is to be gained from more data, but we repeat our concerns about the relevance of story
prediction as a comprehension task. We also wish to encourage more efﬁcient learning from less data.
2.5 SQ UAD
The comprehension dataset most closely related to NewsQA isSQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). It
consists of natural language questions posed by crowdworkers on paragraphs from high-PageRank
Wikipedia articles. As in NewsQA , each answer consists of a span of text from the related paragraph
and no candidates are provided. Despite the effort of manual labelling, SQuAD ’s size is signiﬁcant
and amenable to deep learning approaches: 107,785 question-answer pairs based on 536 articles.
Although SQuAD is a more realistic and more challenging comprehension task than the other
largescale MC datasets, machine performance has rapidly improved towards that of humans in recent
months. The SQuAD authors measured human accuracy at 0.905 in F1 (we measured human F1
at 0.807 using a different methodology); at the time of writing, the strongest published model to
date achieves 0.778 F1 (Wang et al., 2016). This suggests that new, more difﬁcult alternatives like
NewsQA could further push the development of more intelligent MC systems.
3 C OLLECTION METHODOLOGY
We collected NewsQA through a four-stage process: article curation, question sourcing, answer
sourcing, and validation. We also applied a post-processing step with answer agreement consolidation
and span merging to enhance the usability of the dataset. These steps are detailed below.
3.1 A RTICLE CURATION
We retrieve articles from CNN using the script created by Hermann et al. (2015) for CNN/Daily
Mail . From the returned set of 90,266 articles, we select 12,744 uniformly at random. These cover a
wide range of topics that includes politics, economics, and current events. Articles are partitioned at
random into a training set (90%), a development set (5%), and a test set (5%).
3.2 Q UESTION SOURCING
It was important to us to collect challenging questions that could not be answered using straightforward
word- or context-matching. Like Richardson et al. (2013) we want to encourage reasoning in
comprehension models. We are also interested in questions that, in some sense, model human
curiosity and reﬂect actual human use-cases of information seeking. Along a similar line, we consider
it an important (though as yet overlooked) capacity of a comprehension model to recognize when
3
given information is inadequate, so we are also interested in questions that may not have sufﬁcient
evidence in the text. Our question sourcing stage was designed to solicit questions of this nature, and
deliberately separated from the answer sourcing stage for the same reason.
Questioners (a distinct set of crowdworkers) see only a news article’s headline and its summary
points (also available from CNN); they do not see the full article itself. They are asked to formulate
a question from this incomplete information. This encourages curiosity about the contents of the
full article and prevents questions that are simple reformulations of sentences in the text. It also
increases the likelihood of questions whose answers do not exist in the text. We reject questions that
have signiﬁcant word overlap with the summary points to ensure that crowdworkers do not treat the
summaries as mini-articles, and further discouraged this in the instructions. During collection each
Questioner is solicited for up to three questions about an article. They are provided with positive and
negative examples to prompt and guide them (detailed instructions are shown in Figure 3).
3.3 A NSWER SOURCING
A second set of crowdworkers ( Answerers ) provide answers. Although this separation of question
and answer increases the overall cognitive load, we hypothesized that unburdening Questioners in
this way would encourage more complex questions. Answerers receive a full article along with a
crowdsourced question and are tasked with determining the answer. They may also reject the question
as nonsensical, or select the nullanswer if the article contains insufﬁcient information. Answers are
submitted by clicking on and highlighting words in the article, while instructions encourage the set
of answer words to consist of a single continuous span (again, we give an example prompt in the
Appendix). For each question we solicit answers from multiple crowdworkers (avg. 2.73) with the
aim of achieving agreement between at least two Answerers.
3.4 V ALIDATION
Crowdsourcing is a powerful tool but it is not without peril (collection glitches; uninterested or
malicious workers). To obtain a dataset of the highest possible quality we use a validation process
that mitigates some of these issues. In validation, a third set of crowdworkers sees the full article, a
question, and the set of unique answers to that question. We task these workers with choosing the
best answer from the candidate set or rejecting all answers. Each article-question pair is validated by
an average of 2.48 crowdworkers. Validation was used on those questions without answer-agreement
after the previous stage, amounting to 43.2% of all questions.
3.5 A NSWER MARKING AND CLEANUP
After validation, 86.0% of all questions in NewsQA have answers agreed upon by at least two separate
crowdworkers—either at the initial answer sourcing stage or in the top-answer selection. This
improves the dataset’s quality. We choose to include the questions without agreed answers in the
corpus also, but they are specially marked. Such questions could be treated as having the nullanswer
and used to train models that are aware of poorly posed questions.
As a ﬁnal cleanup step we combine answer spans that are less than 3 words apart (punctuation is
discounted). We ﬁnd that 5.68% of answers consist of multiple spans, while 71.3% of multi-spans
are within the 3-word threshold. Looking more closely at the data reveals that the multi-span answers
often represent lists. These may present an interesting challenge for comprehension models moving
forward.
4 D ATA ANALYSIS
We provide a thorough analysis of NewsQA to demonstrate its challenge and its usefulness as a
machine comprehension benchmark. The analysis focuses on the types of answers that appear in the
dataset and the various forms of reasoning required to solve it.1
1Additional statistics are available at https://datasets.maluuba.com/NewsQA/stats .
4
Table 1: The variety of answer types appearing in NewsQA , with proportion statistics and examples.
Answer type Example Proportion (%)
Date/Time March 12, 2008 2.9
Numeric 24.3 million 9.8
Person Ludwig van Beethoven 14.8
Location Torrance, California 7.8
Other Entity Pew Hispanic Center 5.8
Common Noun Phr. federal prosecutors 22.2
Adjective Phr. 5-hour 1.9
Verb Phr. suffered minor damage 1.4
Clause Phr. trampling on human rights 18.3
Prepositional Phr. in the attack 3.8
Other nearly half 11.2
4.1 A NSWER TYPES
Following Rajpurkar et al. (2016), we categorize answers based on their linguistic type (see Table 1).
This categorization relies on Stanford CoreNLP to generate constituency parses, POS tags, and NER
tags for answer spans (see Rajpurkar et al. (2016) for more details). From the table we see that the
majority of answers (22.2%) are common noun phrases. Thereafter, answers are fairly evenly spread
among the clause phrase (18.3%), person (14.8%), numeric (9.8%), and other (11.2%) types. Clearly,
answers in NewsQA are linguistically diverse.
The proportions in Table 1 only account for cases when an answer span exists. The complement of
this set comprises questions with an agreed nullanswer (9.5% of the full corpus) and answers without
agreement after validation (4.5% of the full corpus).
4.2 R EASONING TYPES
The forms of reasoning required to solve NewsQA directly inﬂuence the abilities that models will
learn from the dataset. We stratiﬁed reasoning types using a variation on the taxonomy presented
by Chen et al. (2016) in their analysis of the CNN/Daily Mail dataset. Types are as follows, in
ascending order of difﬁculty:
1.Word Matching: Important words in the question exactly match words in the immediate
context of an answer span, such that a keyword search algorithm could perform well on this
subset.
2.Paraphrasing: A single sentence in the article entails or paraphrases the question. Para-
phrase recognition may require synonymy and world knowledge.
3.Inference: The answer must be inferred from incomplete information in the article or by
recognizing conceptual overlap. This typically draws on world knowledge.
4.Synthesis: The answer can only be inferred by synthesizing information distributed across
multiple sentences.
5.Ambiguous/Insufﬁcient: The question has no answer or no unique answer in the article.
For both NewsQA andSQuAD , we manually labelled 1,000 examples (drawn randomly from the
respective development sets) according to these types and compiled the results in Table 2. Some
examples fall into more than one category, in which case we defaulted to the more challenging type.
We can see from the table that word matching, the easiest type, makes up the largest subset in both
datasets (32.7% for NewsQA and 39.8% for SQuAD ). Paraphrasing constitutes a larger proportion
inSQuAD than in NewsQA (34.3% vs 27.0%), possibly a result from the explicit encouragement of
lexical variety in SQuAD question sourcing. However, NewsQA signiﬁcantly outnumbers SQuAD on
the distribution of the more difﬁcult forms of reasoning: synthesis and inference make up a combined
33.9% of the data in contrast to 20.5% in SQuAD .
5
Table 2: Reasoning mechanisms needed to answer questions. For each we show an example question
with the sentence that contains the answer span. Words relevant to the reasoning type are in bold.
The corresponding proportion in the human-evaluated subset of both NewsQA andSQuAD (1,000
samples each) is also given.
Reasoning ExampleProportion (%)
NewsQA SQuAD
Word Matching Q: When were theﬁndings published ?
S: Both sets of research ﬁndings were published Thursday ...32.7 39.8
Paraphrasing Q: Who is the struggle between in Rwanda?
S: The struggle pits ethnic Tutsis , supported by Rwanda, against ethnic Hutu ,
backed by Congo.27.0 34.3
Inference Q: Who drew inspiration from presidents ?
S:Rudy Ruiz says the lives of US presidents can make them positive role models
for students.13.2 8.6
Synthesis Q: Where isBrittanee Drexel from?
S: The mother of a 17-year-old Rochester ,New York high school student ... says
she did not give her daughter permission to go on the trip. Brittanee Marie Drexel ’s
mom says...20.7 11.9
Ambiguous/Insufﬁcient Q: Whose mother ismoving to the White House?
S: ... Barack Obama’s mother-in-law , Marian Robinson, will join the Obamas
at the family’s private quarters at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. [Michelle is never
mentioned]6.4 5.4
5 B ASELINE MODELS
We test the performance of three comprehension systems on NewsQA : human data analysts and
two neural models. The ﬁrst neural model is the match-LSTM (mLSTM) system of Wang & Jiang
(2016b). The second is a model of our own design that is similar but computationally cheaper. We
describe these models below but omit the personal details of our analysts. Implementation details of
the models are described in Appendix A.
5.1 M ATCH -LSTM
We selected the mLSTM model because it is straightforward to implement and offers strong, though
not state-of-the-art, performance on the similar SQuAD dataset. There are three stages involved
in the mLSTM. First, LSTM networks encode the document and question (represented by GloVe
word embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014)) as sequences of hidden states. Second, an mLSTM
network (Wang & Jiang, 2016a) compares the document encodings with the question encodings.
This network processes the document sequentially and at each token uses an attention mechanism to
obtain a weighted vector representation of the question; the weighted combination is concatenated
with the encoding of the current token and fed into a standard LSTM. Finally, a Pointer Network uses
the hidden states of the mLSTM to select the boundaries of the answer span. We refer the reader
to Wang & Jiang (2016a;b) for full details.
5.2 T HEBILINEAR ANNOTATION RE-ENCODING BOUNDARY (BARB) M ODEL
The match-LSTM is computationally intensive since it computes an attention over the entire question
at each document token in the recurrence. To facilitate faster experimentation with NewsQA we
developed a lighter-weight model (BARB) that achieves similar results on SQuAD2. Our model
consists of four stages:
Encoding All words in the document and question are mapped to real-valued vectors using the
GloVe embeddings W2RjVjd. This yields d1; : : : ;dn2Rdandq1; : : : ;qm2Rd. A bidirec-
2With the conﬁgurations for the results reported in Section 6.2, one epoch of training on NewsQA takes about
3.9k seconds for BARB and 8.1k seconds for mLSTM .
6
tional GRU network (Bahdanau et al., 2015) encodes diinto contextual states hi2RD1for the
document. The same encoder is applied to qjto derive contextual states kj2RD1for the question.3
Bilinear Annotation Next we compare the document and question encodings using a set of C
bilinear transformations,
gij=hT
iT[1:C]kj;Tc2RD1D1;gij2RC;
which we use to produce an (nmC)-dimensional tensor of annotation scores, G= [gij]. We
take the maximum over the question-token (second) dimension and call the columns of the resulting
matrix gi2RC. We use this matrix as an annotation over the document word dimension. In
contrast with the more typical multiplicative application of attention vectors, this annotation matrix is
concatenated to the encoder RNN input in the re-encoding stage.
Re-encoding For each document word, the input of the re-encoding RNN (another biGRU) consists
of three components: the document encodings hi, the annotation vectors gi, and a binary feature qi
indicating whether the document word appears in the question. The resulting vectors fi= [hi;gi;qi]
are fed into the re-encoding RNN to produce D2-dimensional encodings eifor the boundary-pointing
stage.
Boundary pointing Finally, we search for the boundaries of the answer span using a convolutional
network (in a process similar to edge detection). Encodings eiare arranged in matrix E2RD2n.
Eis convolved with a bank of nfﬁlters, F`
k2RD2w, where wis the ﬁlter width, kindexes the
different ﬁlters, and `indexes the layer of the convolutional network. Each layer has the same number
of ﬁlters of the same dimensions. We add a bias term and apply a nonlinearity (ReLU) following
each convolution, with the result an (nfn)-dimensional matrix B`.
We use two convolutional layers in the boundary-pointing stage. Given B1andB2, the answer
span’s start- and end-location probabilities are computed using p(s)/exp 
vT
sB1+bs
andp(e)/
exp 
vT
eB2+be
, respectively. We also concatenate p(s)to the input of the second convolutional
layer (along the nf-dimension) so as to condition the end-boundary pointing on the start-boundary.
Vectors vs,ve2Rnfand scalars bs,be2Rare trainable parameters.
We also provide an intermediate level of “guidance” to the annotation mechanism by ﬁrst reducing
the feature dimension CinGwith mean-pooling, then maximizing the softmax probabilities in the
resulting ( n-dimensional) vector corresponding to the answer word positions in each document. This
auxiliary task is observed empirically to improve performance.
6 E XPERIMENTS4
6.1 H UMAN EVALUATION
We tested four English speakers on a total of 1,000 questions from the NewsQA development set.
We used four performance measures: F1 and exact match (EM) scores (the same measures used
bySQuAD ), as well as BLEU and CIDEr5. BLEU is a precision-based metric popular in machine
translation that uses a weighted average of variable length phrase matches ( n-grams) against the
reference sentence (Papineni et al., 2002). CIDEr was designed to correlate better with human
judgements of sentence similarity, and uses tf-idf scores over n-grams (Vedantam et al., 2015).
As given in Table 4, humans averaged 0.694 F1 on NewsQA . The human EM scores are relatively
low at 0.465. These lower scores are a reﬂection of the fact that, particularly in a dataset as complex
asNewsQA , there are multiple ways to select semantically equivalent answers, e.g., “1996” versus
“in 1996”. Although these answers are equally correct they would be measured at 0.5 F1 and 0.0 EM.
3A bidirectional GRU concatenates the hidden states of two GRU networks running in opposite directions.
Each of these has hidden size1
2D1.
4All experiments in this section use the subset of NewsQA dataset with answer agreements (92,549 samples
for training, 5,166 for validation, and 5,126 for testing). We leave the challenge of identifying the unanswerable
questions for future work.
5We use https://github.com/tylin/coco-caption to calculate these two scores.
7
Table 3: Model performance on SQuAD andNewsQA datasets. Random are taken from Rajpurkar
et al. (2016), and mLSTM from Wang & Jiang (2016b).
SQuAD Exact Match F1
Model Dev Test Dev Test
Random 0.11 0.13 0.41 0.43
mLSTM 0.591 0.595 0.700 0.703
BARB 0.591 - 0.709 -NewsQA Exact Match F1
Model Dev Test Dev Test
Random 0.00 0.00 0.30 0.30
mLSTM 0.344 0.349 0.496 0.500
BARB 0.361 0.341 0.496 0.482
Table 4: Human performance on SQuAD andNewsQA datasets. The ﬁrst row is taken from Rajpurkar
et al. (2016), and the last two rows correspond to machine performance (BARB) on the human-
evaluated subsets.
Dataset Exact Match F1 BLEU CIDEr
SQuAD 0.803 0.905 - -
SQuAD (ours) 0.650 0.807 0.625 3.998
NewsQA 0.465 0.694 0.560 3.596
SQuAD BARB 0.553 0.685 0.366 2.845
NewsQA BARB 0.340 0.501 0.081 2.431
This suggests that simpler automatic metrics are not equal to the task of complex MC evaluation, a
problem that has been noted in other domains (Liu et al., 2016). Therefore we also measure according
to BLEU and CIDEr: humans score 0.560 and 3.596 on these metrics, respectively.
The original SQuAD evaluation of human performance compares distinct answers given by crowd-
workers according to EM and F1; for a closer comparison with NewsQA , we replicated our human
test on the same number of validation data (1,000) with the same humans. We measured human
answers against the second group of crowdsourced responses in SQuAD ’s development set, yielding
0.807 F1, 0.625 BLEU, and 3.998 CIDEr. Note that the F1 score is close to the top single-model
performance of 0.778 achieved in Wang et al. (2016).
We ﬁnally compared human performance on the answers that had crowdworker agreement with and
without validation, ﬁnding a difference of only 1.4 percentage points F1. This suggests our validation
stage yields good-quality answers.
6.2 M ODEL PERFORMANCE
Performance of the baseline models and humans is measured by EM and F1 with the ofﬁcial evaluation
script from SQuAD and listed in Table 4. We supplement these with BLEU and CIDEr measures on
the 1,000 human-annotated dev questions. Unless otherwise stated, hyperparameters are determined
byhyperopt (Appendix A). The gap between human and machine performance on NewsQA is
a striking 0.198 points F1 — much larger than the gap on SQuAD (0.098) under the same human
evaluation scheme. The gaps suggest a large margin for improvement with machine comprehension
methods.
Figure 1 stratiﬁes model (BARB) performance according to answer type (left) and reasoning type
(right) as deﬁned in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, respectively. The answer-type stratiﬁcation suggests that
the model is better at pointing to named entities compared to other types of answers. The reasoning-
type stratiﬁcation, on the other hand, shows that questions requiring inference andsynthesis are,
not surprisingly, more difﬁcult for the model. Consistent with observations in Table 4, stratiﬁed
performance on NewsQA is signiﬁcantly lower than on SQuAD . The difference is smallest on word
matching and largest on synthesis. We postulate that the longer stories in NewsQA make synthesizing
information from separate sentences more difﬁcult, since the relevant sentences may be farther apart.
This requires the model to track longer-term dependencies. It is also interesting to observe that on
SQuAD , BARB outperforms human annotators in answering ambiguous questions or those with
incomplete information.
8
Date/timeNumericPersonAdjective PhraseLocationPrepositional PhraseCommon Noun PhraseOtherOther entityClause PhraseVerb Phrase00.20.40.60.8F1EM
Word MatchingParaphrasingInferenceSynthesisAmbiguous/ Insufﬁcient0.0000.1500.3000.4500.6000.7500.900NewsQASQuADFigure 1: Left: BARB performance (F1 and EM) stratiﬁed by answer type on the full development
set of NewsQA .Right : BARB performance (F1) stratiﬁed by reasoning type on the human-assessed
subset on both NewsQA andSQuAD . Error bars indicate performance differences between BARB
and human annotators.
Table 5: Sentence-level accuracy on artiﬁcially-lengthened SQuAD documents.
SQuAD NewsQA
# documents 1 3 5 7 9 1
Avg # sentences 4.9 14.3 23.2 31.8 40.3 30.7
isf 79.6 74.9 73.0 72.3 71.0 35.4
6.3 S ENTENCE -LEVEL SCORING
We propose a simple sentence-level subtask as an additional quantitative demonstration of the relative
difﬁculty of NewsQA . Given a document and a question, the goal is to ﬁnd the sentence containing
the answer span. We hypothesize that simple techniques like word-matching are inadequate to this
task owing to the more involved reasoning required by NewsQA .
We employ a technique that resembles inverse document frequency ( idf), which we call inverse
sentence frequency ( isf). Given a sentence Sifrom an article and its corresponding question Q, the
isfscore is given by the sum of the idfscores of the words common to SiandQ(each sentence is
treated as a document for the idfcomputation). The sentence with the highest isfis taken as the
answer sentenceS, that is,
S= arg max
iX
w2Si\Qisf(w):
Theisfmethod achieves an impressive 79.4% sentence-level accuracy on SQuAD ’s development set
but only 35.4% accuracy on NewsQA ’s development set, highlighting the comparative difﬁculty of
the latter. To eliminate the difference in article length as a possible cause of the performance gap, we
also artiﬁcially increased the article lengths in SQuAD by concatenating adjacent SQuAD articles
from the same Wikipedia article . Accuracy decreases as expected with the increased SQuAD article
length, yet remains signiﬁcantly higher than on NewsQA with comparable or even greater article
length (see Table 5).
7 C ONCLUSION
We have introduced a challenging new comprehension dataset: NewsQA . We collected the 100,000+
examples of NewsQA using teams of crowdworkers, who variously read CNN articles or highlights,
posed questions about them, and determined answers. Our methodology yields diverse answer
types and a signiﬁcant proportion of questions that require some reasoning ability to solve. This
makes the corpus challenging, as conﬁrmed by the large performance gap between humans and deep
neural models (0.198 F1, 0.479 BLEU, 1.165 CIDEr). By its size and complexity, NewsQA makes
a signiﬁcant extension to the existing body of comprehension datasets. We hope that our corpus
will spur further advances in machine comprehension and guide the development of literate artiﬁcial
intelligence.
9
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Ça ˘glar Gülçehre, Sandeep Subramanian and Saizheng Zhang for
helpful discussions.
REFERENCES
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. ICLR , 2015.
Ondrej Bajgar, Rudolf Kadlec, and Jan Kleindienst. Embracing data abundance: Booktest dataset for
reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.00956 , 2016.
J. Bergstra, O. Breuleux, F. Bastien, P. Lamblin, R. Pascanu, G. Desjardins, J. Turian, D. Warde-
Farley, and Y . Bengio. Theano: a CPU and GPU math expression compiler. In In Proc. of SciPy ,
2010.
Danqi Chen, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D. Manning. A thorough examination of the cnn / daily
mail reading comprehension task. In Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2016.
François Chollet. keras. https://github.com/fchollet/keras , 2015.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difﬁculty of training deep feedforward neural
networks. In Aistats , volume 9, pp. 249–256, 2010.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa
Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. Teaching machines to read and comprehend. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pp. 1684–1692, 2015.
Felix Hill, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston. The goldilocks principle: Reading
children’s books with explicit memory representations. ICLR , 2016.
Rudolf Kadlec, Martin Schmid, Ondrej Bajgar, and Jan Kleindienst. Text understanding with the
attention sum reader network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01547 , 2016.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. ICLR , 2015.
Chia-Wei Liu, Ryan Lowe, Iulian V Serban, Michael Noseworthy, Laurent Charlin, and Joelle Pineau.
How not to evaluate your dialogue system: An empirical study of unsupervised evaluation metrics
for dialogue response generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08023 , 2016.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on association for
computational linguistics , pp. 311–318. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difﬁculty of training recurrent neural
networks. ICML (3) , 28:1310–1318, 2013.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In EMNLP , volume 14, pp. 1532–43, 2014.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05250 , 2016.
Matthew Richardson, Christopher JC Burges, and Erin Renshaw. Mctest: A challenge dataset for the
open-domain machine comprehension of text. In EMNLP , volume 1, pp. 2, 2013.
Mrinmaya Sachan, Avinava Dubey, Eric P Xing, and Matthew Richardson. Learning answerentailing
structures for machine comprehension. In Proceedings of ACL , 2015.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics
of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120 , 2013.
10
Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Yoshua Bengio. Iterative alternating neural attention for
machine reading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.02245 , 2016.
Adam Trischler, Zheng Ye, Xingdi Yuan, Jing He, Philip Bachman, and Kaheer Suleman. A parallel-
hierarchical model for machine comprehension on sparse data. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2016a.
Adam Trischler, Zheng Ye, Xingdi Yuan, and Kaheer Suleman. Natural language comprehension
with the epireader. In EMNLP , 2016b.
Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Cider: Consensus-based image
description evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pp. 4566–4575, 2015.
Hai Wang, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and David McAllester. Machine comprehension with syntax,
frames, and semantics. In Proceedings of ACL, Volume 2: Short Papers , pp. 700, 2015.
Shuohang Wang and Jing Jiang. Learning natural language inference with lstm. NAACL , 2016a.
Shuohang Wang and Jing Jiang. Machine comprehension using match-lstm and answer pointer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1608.07905 , 2016b.
Zhiguo Wang, Haitao Mi, Wael Hamza, and Radu Florian. Multi-perspective context matching for
machine comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.04211 , 2016.
11
APPENDICES
A I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Both mLSTM and BARB are implemented with the Keras framework (Chollet, 2015) using the
Theano (Bergstra et al., 2010) backend. Word embeddings are initialized using GloVe vectors
(Pennington et al., 2014) pre-trained on the 840-billion Common Crawl corpus. The word embeddings
are not updated during training. Embeddings for out-of-vocabulary words are initialized with zero.
For both models, the training objective is to maximize the log likelihood of the boundary pointers.
Optimization is performed using stochastic gradient descent (with a batch-size of 32) with the ADAM
optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015). The initial learning rate is 0.003 for mLSTM and 0.0005 for BARB.
The learning rate is decayed by a factor of 0.7 if validation loss does not decrease at the end of each
epoch. Gradient clipping (Pascanu et al., 2013) is applied with a threshold of 5.
Parameter tuning is performed on both models using hyperopt6. For each model, conﬁgurations
for the best observed performance are as follows:
mLSTM
Both the pre-processing layer and the answer-pointing layer use bi-directional RNN with a hidden
size of 192. These settings are consistent with those used by Wang & Jiang (2016b).
Model parameters are initialized with either the normal distribution ( N(0;0:05)) or the orthogonal
initialization (O, Saxe et al. 2013) in Keras. All weight matrices in the LSTMs are initialized with O.
In the Match-LSTM layer, Wq,Wp, andWrare initialized with O,bpandware initialized with N,
andbis initialized as 1.
In the answer-pointing layer, VandWaare initialized with O,baandvare initialized with N, andc
is initialized as 1.
BARB
For BARB, the following hyperparameters are used on both SQuAD andNewsQA :d= 300 ,D1=
128,C= 64 ,D2= 256 ,w= 3, andnf= 128 . Weight matrices in the GRU, the bilinear models, as
well as the boundary decoder ( vsandve) are initialized with O. The ﬁlter weights in the boundary
decoder are initialized with glorot_uniform (Glorot & Bengio 2010, default in Keras). The bilinear
biases are initialized with N, and the boundary decoder biases are initialized with 0.
B D ATA COLLECTION USER INTERFACE
Here we present the user interfaces used in question sourcing, answer sourcing, and question/answer
validation.
6https://github.com/hyperopt/hyperopt
12
Figure 2: Examples of user interfaces for question sourcing, answer sourcing, and validation.
13
Figure 3: Question sourcing instructions for the crowdworkers.
14