Title: Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning

Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
Sebastian Farquhar1Yarin Gal1
Abstract
Experiments used in current continual learning
research do not faithfully assess fundamental chal-
lenges of learning continually. Instead of assess-
ing performance on challenging and representa-
tive experiment designs, recent research has fo-
cused on increased dataset difﬁculty, while still
using ﬂawed experiment set-ups. We examine
standard evaluations and show why these evalua-
tions make some continual learning approaches
look better than they are. We introduce desider-
ata for continual learning evaluations and explain
why their absence creates misleading compar-
isons. Based on our desiderata we then propose
new experiment designs which we demonstrate
with various continual learning approaches and
datasets. Our analysis calls for a reprioritization
of research effort by the community.
1. Introduction
Certain applications require continual learning—splitting
training into a series of tasks and discarding the data after
training each task. These settings vary tremendously. If
data relate to individuals it may be unethical, illegal, or
imprudent to retain old datasets: for example, a hospital
might want to delete old patient data. In other applications,
real-time systems could face distributional shifts with an
underlying distribution which changes faster than the time it
would take to retrain a new model with all the data. For ex-
ample, a Mars rover might cross regions of different terrain
that require adaptation without forgetting. Neural networks
trained on such series of tasks tend to forget earlier tasks
(often referred to as catastrophic forgetting ).
Recent works have shown promising advances towards
continual learning by adding regularization terms to the
loss function which preserve important parameters (Kirk-
patrick et al., 2017; Zenke et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2018;
Chaudhry et al., 2018; Ritter et al., 2018). We call these
1OATML Research Group, Department of Computer Science,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Se-
bastian Farquhar <sebastian.farquhar@cs.ox.ac.uk >.
Copyright 2018 by the author(s).approaches ‘prior-focused’ because they can be interpreted
as treating intermediate models as priors when learning
updated weights. Although a useful starting point, experi-
mental evaluations in these recent works have major blind-
spots which mask weak-points of current approaches. The
design of the evaluations does not fully reﬂect the core mo-
tivations for continual learning, regardless of the dataset
used, including evaluations based on MNIST (LeCun et al.,
1998), notMNIST (Bulatov, 2011), FashionMNIST (Xiao
et al., 2017), CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and others. But
evaluations which obscure the shortcomings of suggested
continual learning solutions impede developments in the
ﬁeld, since researchers are not made aware of limitations of
past research.
In this paper, we explore desiderata for continual learn-
ing evaluations based on real-world uses. Applications of
continual learning are very diverse, and authors consider
a wide range of settings. As a result, rather than propose
a single benchmark which risks being overly narrow, we
propose fundamental desiderata for empirical evaluations
in continual learning to make them more representative of
the challenges that motivate the ﬁeld. We then demonstrate
that experiments which neglect our core desiderata can be
misleading—a continual learning system that performs well
when a subset of the desiderata are in place might fail en-
tirely when a core desideratum is imposed. No prior-focused
continual learning system has so far been shown to succeed
when all ﬁve desiderata are applied. We demonstrate that
several leading prior-focused approaches stop working on
a more robust evaluation. We therefore argue that existing
evaluations are biased, because prior-focused approaches
appear to succeed, but have major blind-spots. Lastly, we
introduce new evaluations based on our list of desiderata
which offer richer challenges for continual learning systems.
Speciﬁcally, our four main contributions are as follows:
1.We propose fundamental desiderata for future evalua-
tions, which can be applied regardless of dataset.
2.We analyse the shortcomings of existing widely used
evaluations in continual learning.
3.We show empirically that existing evaluations are bi-
ased towards prior-focused approaches.arXiv:1805.09733v3  [stat.ML]  26 Jun 2019
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
4.We propose new experimental designs which mitigate
the issues of existing ones.
2. Continual Learning
We start by formalising the deﬁnition of continual learning .
In a typical supervised learning setting, we aim to learn
parameters wusing an independently and identically dis-
tributed (i.i.d.) labelled training dataset Df (x(i);y(i))g
to accurately predict p(yjw;x)for an unseen (x;y)
pair.
In the continual learning setting, members of Dare not
i.i.d. Instead they may be split into disjoint subsets Dt
f(x(i)
t;y(i)
t)g. These sets are assumed to be drawn from
Tdistinct i.i.d. distributions each of which represents a
task. The challenge of continual learning is to learn a sin-
gle model which is able to predict well on data from any
task, despite training on each task in sequence without de-
liberately revisiting previous tasks. For some applications,
stronger or weaker assumptions are made. For example,
Nguyen et al. (2018) concern themselves with fast adapta-
tion, so they allow themselves to retain a small coreset of
data from old tasks. Similarly, Kirkpatrick et al. (2017);
Schwarz et al. (2018b) consider a simulation in which they
allow themselves to revisit each task multiple times. In this
paper, we will frequently consider a model after training on
some, but not necessarily all Ttasks. Thet’th model is the
state of the model after training on datasets fD1:Dtg.
3. Proposed Desiderata for Continual
Learning Evaluations
The setting and motivation for continual learning can vary
enormously, from image segmentation to medical diagnos-
tics to control. Specialized continual learning datasets like
Core50 (Lomonaco and Maltoni, 2017) or environments
such as that in Schwarz et al. (2018a) are therefore useful
for subﬁelds but cannot be seen as an overall benchmark
for continual learning. We therefore concentrate instead
on developing set of sufﬁcient desiderata for future eval-
uations of continual learning. We propose the following
fundamental principles which ought either to be respected
or to be explicitly mentioned as absent. In x5 we offer a
critical analysis of existing experiments which suggests why
core desiderata are important. In x6.3, we present a set of
experiments showing how neglecting these core aspects can
make a continual learning system look more successful than
it is.
Use cases of continual leaning vary tremendously. One
example is a hospital developing a system for automated dis-
ease diagnosis using patient sub-population A which is then
reﬁned in a different hospital with patient sub-populations
B (with sub-population A data not allowed to leave the ﬁrsthospital). A second example is a wind-turbine safety sys-
tem which predicts wind velocity an hour ahead to decide
whether to turn off the turbine in case of strong winds, with
wind dynamics changing between the seasons of the year.
A third example is an ad serving system that has to update
with huge amounts of streaming data, without feasibly being
able to keep all data around. Yet another use case is a Mars
rover updating its behaviour as it encounters new types of
terrain—perhaps much looser or coarser soil than it has seen
before—but which must remain able to manoeuvre on old
terrain. All use cases share common core desiderata, which
we demonstrate next using the Mars rover example for con-
creteness. Note that this example is for illustrative purposes
only—we are notproposing that this example should be
used for evaluations. Our desiderata arise just as readily
from other settings.
A: Cross-task resemblances Input data from later tasks
must resemble old tasks enough that they at least some-
times result in conﬁdent predictions of old classes,
early in training. The widely used Permuted MNIST
(seex4.2.1) which violates this would correspond to
every input sensor in our Mars rover being randomly
rewired—unlikely to be representative of real cases.
B: Shared output head If each task is given a different
output vector during training and testing, it must be
explicitly and prominently mentioned. This has a large
effect on the difﬁculty of the challenge. In our example,
the rover is using the same outputs to control its motors
in all terrain.
C: No test-time assumed task labels Related to desidera-
tum B, if we knew in advance what the tasks were and
had a way to distinguish them, one could have a differ-
ent model for each task and switch between them. In
our example, if the rover has a good way to distinguish
rock from dust and can learn a separate policy for each
it might not need continual learning.
D: No unconstrained retraining on old tasks Many mo-
tivations of continual learning preclude being able to
retrain on task 1after having trained on task T. In our
example, the rover needs to actually move into terrain
it has left behind before it can train there. In other
examples, even retaining small amounts of data from
old tasks might violate privacy laws
E: More than two tasks The more tasks a continual learn-
ing system can handle the better. Our rover, for ex-
ample, may face a potentially open-ended and large
number of tasks. Two-task transfer ( x4.2.3) is therefore
interesting, but succeeding at two-task transfer does
not guarantee good performance on more tasks.
In certain applications we might deliberately ignore some
of the desiderata. For example, Nguyen et al. (2018) neglect
desiderata B and C because they consider fast adaptation to
new tasks which have labels during both training and test-
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
ing. In a setting with easy access to a simulation of all tasks,
retraining might be permissible, setting aside desideratum D
(as in Schwarz et al. (2018b)). Desideratum E is mostly set
aside for convenience—there might be interesting interme-
diate research which is nevertheless useful progress for the
ﬁeld. Desideratum A is mostly neglected for historical rea-
sons discussed inx5.1. While the ﬁve listed desiderata will
not always be applicable, it remains a surprising fact that
there is no prior-focused approach that has been shown
to perform well in an evaluation with all of the ﬁve core
desiderata .
The core desiderata are a starting point which can lead to
more difﬁcult challenges, some of which are beginning to
be addressed by recent work, including:
Unclear task demarcation Task boundaries are generally
assumed knowledge during training.
Continuous tasks Current practice usually assumes that
tasks are discretely different rather than varying con-
tinuously.
Overlapping tasks Current practice tends to have tasks
where each task has its own classes which are disjoint
from the other tasks. Lomonaco and Maltoni (2017)
discuss this point.
Long task sequences Continual learning is most interest-
ing over extremely long sequences of tasks.
Time/compute/memory constraints It is widely acknowl-
edged that continual learning solutions that update
quickly or use small/ﬁxed memory are more useful
than ones that have large computational overheads.
Strict privacy guarantees For settings motivated by pri-
vacy, tracking the differential privacy guarantees be-
tween tasks is important.
Each of these further desiderata offers a way to make a con-
tinual learning evaluation more representative of the needs
of applications without making the dataset itself harder . In
x6.4 we suggest two experiments that address the most in-
teresting of these. In x6.4.1 we show how model uncertainty
can be used to detect task changes, which is essential in
many practical settings and allows streaming settings to be
converted into continual learning ones. In x6.4.2 we show
how training time and accuracy must be traded off against
each other as design choices, rather than just reporting the
time taken by the most accurate system. Memory can be
treated like time, here, and the other desiderata are straight-
forward to construct from existing datasets by tweaking the
dataloader.
We note that a very real risk for the ﬁeld is to embrace more
complex datasets before establishing robust experimental
design. Until we have continual learning evaluations that
test the core challenges of continual learning, moving from
MNIST to more complex datasets does little to measure
progress in continual learning itself.
Figure 1. We contrast prior-focused with likelihood-focused con-
tinual learning. By comparing these, and hybrid forms, we can see
which evaluations pose a bigger challenge to different approaches.
4. Existing Work
In this paper, we critically analyse common evaluations used
by the majority of recent papers. In this section, we review
existing work focusing ﬁrst on the methods employed ( x4.1)
and second on the evaluations used ( x4.2). Throughout, we
provide a framing which anticipates our critical analysis.
4.1. Methods
Approaches to continual learning and catastrophic forget-
ting form three main families. First, prior-focused ap-
proaches use regularization to create ‘elastic’ parameters.
These include: Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) (Kirk-
patrick et al., 2017; Huszar, 2018), Synaptic Intelligence (SI)
(Zenke et al., 2017), Variational Continual Learning (VCL)
(Nguyen et al., 2018), Kronecker-factored approximated
Laplace approximation (Ritter et al., 2018), and Riemanian
Walk (RW) (Chaudhry et al., 2018). In fact, all of these can
be seen as setting a distribution over the parameters of the
t 1’th model as the prior when training on the t’th dataset.
VCL makes this most explicit. VCL is a variational in-
ference (VI) method that uses Bayesian neural networks
(MacKay, 1992; Neal, 1995; Blundell et al., 2015). VCL
sets the posterior at the end of training a task to be the prior
when beginning training for the next task. Schematically,
as the authors of these papers note, all the approximately
Bayesian approaches use a similar loss function:
Lt=X
ilog 
p(y(i)
tjwt;x(i)
t)
 c
2(wt wt 1)T 1
t 1(wt wt 1)(1)
where is the covariance of the prior, which is estimated
differently under each approach. The ﬁrst term reﬂects
model log-likelihood on the t’th task. The second reﬂects
distance from the model prior.
Prior-focused approaches rely on the prior term to capture
everything learned on previous tasks and only use the newest
data to estimate the likelihood term. However, in practice the
prior term is only approximated. Farquhar and Gal (2018b)
contrast prior-focused approaches with a second family,
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
likelihood-focused approaches, that attempt to estimate the
likelihood of the current model on past tasks (see ﬁgure 1).
Examples of this include Deep Generative Replay (DGR)
by Shin et al. (2017), which uses generative models to store
summaries of old tasks, or Variational Generative Replay
(VGR) a variational and simpliﬁed alternative presented in
Farquhar and Gal (2018b). Simply storing a small random
sample or coreset is an alternative approach in this family.
Many members of this family are called rehearsal strategies
after ‘pseudorehearsal’ introduced by Robins (1995), or
called dual-memory strategies following a neuro-scientiﬁc
motivation. However, some dual-memory strategies, e.g.,
GEM (Lopez-paz and Ranzato, 2017) or model adaptation
(Hu et al., 2019), are not likelihood-focused.
Some authors have observed better results for prior-focused
methods with the addition of some likelihood estimation,
although this has not been rigorously explored. For exam-
ple, VCL is also presented using coresets—ﬁne-tuning on
a small withheld sample just before testing. Similarly, RW
presents results both with and without training on subsam-
ples of previous datasets.
The last major family uses dynamic architectures. These
change the structure of the networks in signiﬁcant ways to
incorporate learning from each task separately (e.g., Rusu
et al. (2016); Li and Hoiem (2017)). These perform well,
but in most cases their need for new models for each task
creates growing compute/memory costs that do not seem
to truly solve the continual learning problem. A more thor-
ough survey of these as well as prior- and likelihood-focused
approaches can be found in Appendix A. We focus our ex-
amination on prior-focused and their counterpart likelihood-
focused methods, because they seem to represent the most
exciting recent advances in continual learning, but the ex-
periments used to support them may not be fairly evaluating
their performance.
4.2. Experimental Evaluations
In this section we give an in-depth review of key experimen-
tal evaluations as they are used in current research . We illus-
trate our critique using the most commonly performed ex-
periments using variations of the MNIST dataset: Permuted
MNIST andSplit MNIST , most commonly in multi-headed
form. Although we emphasise MNIST for explanatory pur-
poses, our critique in x5 applies to many other evaluations
which share similar design choices.
4.2.1. P ERMUTED MNIST
The Permuted MNIST experiment was introduced in Good-
fellow et al. (2013a). In their experiment, a model is trained
on MNIST asD1. Each laterDtfor1< t10is con-
structed from the MNIST data but with the pixels of each
digit randomly permuted. A fresh permutation is drawnfor each task and applied to all images in the same way
for that task. After training on each dataset, one evaluates
the model on each of the previous datasets as well as the
current. Goodfellow et al. (2013a) used this experiment
to investigate feature extraction, but it has since become
a mainstay for continual learning evaluation (Zenke et al.,
2017; Shin et al., 2017; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Lee et al.,
2017; Lopez-paz and Ranzato, 2017; Nguyen et al., 2018;
Ritter et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019; Chaudhry et al., 2019).
4.2.2. S PLIT MNIST
The Split MNIST experiment was introduced by Zenke et al.
(2017) in a multi-headed form and used by other authors
including Shin et al. (2017); Nguyen et al. (2018); Chaudhry
et al. (2018) (Ritter et al. (2018) use a two-task variant). The
experiment constructs a series of ﬁve related tasks. The ﬁrst
task is to distinguish the digits (0, 1), then (2, 3) etc. Most
papers use a multi-headed variant the model prediction is
constrained to be only from the two classes represented in
each task. For example, when evaluating the performance on
the ﬁrst task, the model only needs to predict probabilities
for zero versus one. In some cases, multi-heading is taken
even further and training is only done on the head governing
the speciﬁc classes included in the task (Zenke et al., 2017;
Nguyen et al., 2018; Ritter et al., 2018). A single-headed
version does not limit predictions during either training or
testing. As Chaudhry et al. (2018) note, the multi-headed
variant is much easier to solve. Multi-heading is often used
in similar non-MNIST evaluations, for example, in Zenke
et al. (2017); Nguyen et al. (2018); Ritter et al. (2018).
Chaudhry et al. (2018) use both a single- and multi-headed
version of Split MNIST. Hu et al. (2019) use a single-headed
set-up but their method effectively learns a different head
for each task.
4.2.3. T WO-TASK TRANSFER
In some works, a two-task transfer learning evaluation is
used for continual learning. For example, Shin et al. (2017)
train ﬁrst on MNIST and then on SVHN (Netzer et al.,
2011) (or vice versa) in order to see whether their algorithm
preserves performance on the ﬁrst task after training on the
second. Jung et al. (2016), Li and Hoiem (2017), and Pfulb
and Gepperth (2018) perform similar experiments.
4.2.4. D ESIDERATA ,BENCHMARKING AND METRICS
Indicating the importance of robust evaluations, several
authors have recently included some continual learning
desiderata alongside their work. For example, Schwarz et al.
(2018b) list desiderata for continual learning systems which
includes being able to handle long sequences of tasks with-
out knowing task labels and ideally no clear task demarca-
tion, but do not introduce experimental set-ups which could
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
enforce all these desiderata, such as the ones we propose
inx6.4. (Chaudhry et al., 2019) call for time and memory
constraints as well as careful use of cross-validation. Pfulb
and Gepperth (2018) call for testing on many datasets, care
with cross-validation, and storage constraints. Farquhar and
Gal (2018a) discuss the importance of tracking differential
privacy guarantees in continual learning settings motivated
by privacy.
Several authors have commented on the importance of
systematic benchmarks for continual learning, including
Lomonaco and Maltoni (2017), focused on object recogni-
tion, and Schwarz et al. (2018a), focused on control in a
StarCraft environment. Others have worked towards richer
metrics for measuring continual learning performance like
forward/backwards transfer or learning curve area (Lopez-
paz and Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018; Schwarz
et al., 2018b; Diaz-Rodriguez et al., 2018; Chaudhry et al.,
2019). Both of these developments are orthogonal to the
arguments of this paper — well-chosen metrics evaluated in
a challenging environment are still unhelpful if the experi-
ment is not designed to reﬂect the continual learning needs
of diverse applications.
5. Critical Analysis of Existing Evaluations
Pixel permutation (e.g., Permuted MNIST), split classiﬁca-
tion (e.g., multi-headed Split MNIST), and two-task trans-
fer experiments are commonly used to compare continual
learning algorithms. Although they are a useful starting
point, each of these makes continual learning easier for
prior-focused approaches. All of our critiques of the way
MNIST is used by Zenke et al. (2017) apply also to their
use of the CIFAR100 dataset, the use of notMNIST, Fashion
MNIST, SVHN and CIFAR10 in Ritter et al. (2018), and the
use of notMNIST in (Nguyen et al., 2018). These critiques
are about experimental design, not dataset choice.
5.1. Pixel Permutation
Permuted MNIST represents an unrealistic best case sce-
nario for continual learning—although it satisﬁes the literal
deﬁnition of continual learning. The positions of the pixels
are fully randomized—which suited its original purpose.
Goodfellow et al. (2013b) investigated whether neural net-
works have ‘high-level concepts’ that get re-mapped to pixel
positions when the input space is permuted, and found evi-
dence they did not. Now, however, the experiment has been
repurposed for continual learning, where it is not suitable.
An image from each permuted dataset is practically unrecog-
nizable given previous datasets. The actual world is almost
never structured like this—new situations look confusingly
similar to old ones—the sensor input in a Mars rover will
never be permuted no matter what terrain one moves onto.A model presented with a new task in Permuted MNIST
will be uncertain, while in settings that are not deliberately
randomized a model will tend to make conﬁdent but false
predictions. This makes Permuted MNIST signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent from real-world settings in a way that directly affects
how new tasks are learned. In Appendix B.1, we offer an
empirical investigation of this phenomenon and a hypothesis
for the mechanism by which Permuted MNIST simpliﬁes
the continual learning challenge.
5.2. Split Classiﬁcation
The multi-headed version of Split MNIST, which is most
often used, is easier but less relevant to applications because
it requires knowledge of the task and the classes represented
in each task, as Chaudhry et al. (2018) point out. Usually, if
that were possible, continual learning would be unnecessary,
since one could use a separate classiﬁer for each task, which
generally would perform better.
Unfortunately, prior-focused continual learning systems
tend to look much better in multi-headed evaluations than
single-headed ones. Suppose some model has already been
trained on the ﬁrst four tasks of Split MNIST and is then
tested on the digit ‘1’. In the single-headed variant, when
shown a ‘1’ it may incorrectly predict the label is seven,
which was seen more recently. In the multi-headed vari-
ant, we knowingly assume that the label comes from [0:1].
Because the model only needs to decide between 0 and 1
(and not even consider if the image is a 7), a multi-headed
model could correctly predict the label is 1 even though the
same approach will completely fail in a single-headed exper-
iment setup. Most current prior-focused continual learning
systems are good enough that models retain the ability to
distinguish old classes, but only if they are able to know
which task the example is from. A multi-headed evaluation
can therefore make it seem as if an approach has solved a
continual learning problem when it has not. Single-headed
Split MNIST —a less-used evaluation—is the simplest ex-
perimental setting that meets all ﬁve of our core desiderata.
We recommend it as a toy baseline, which is easily adapted
to harder datasets. It satisﬁes our core desiderata: A:The
tasks resemble each other—e.g., a seven can look like a one;
B:Single-heading means all outputs are shared; C:A full
prediction is made over all possible outputs each time; D:
Each task is trained only once and only the model is carried
forwards; and E:There are ﬁve tasks.
5.3. Other non-representative evaluations
Two-task transfer is not representative of realistic problems
because continual learning use-cases might require a long
series of tasks, not just two. An algorithm might have ele-
ments that perform well with just one previous task but fail
with more. For example, the approximate Fisher information
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
matrix used in EWC is estimated using a Taylor expansion
which is only locally accurate in one part of parameter-space.
If, after many tasks, the model reaches a very different part
of parameter-space, the estimated Fisher information for
old tasks will be inaccurate. Moreover, in practice two-task
transfer is just easier than true continual learning: Pfulb
and Gepperth (2018) conclude that a simple fully connected
network will show no catastrophic forgetting on a two-task
Permuted MNIST but do not consider longer task sequences,
while other authors have already shown that with more tasks
there is indeed catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017).
6. Empirical Analysis of Existing Evaluations
This section has three aims. First, we show that experiments
which satisfy only a subset of the ﬁve main desiderata from
x3 can have blind-spots that are important to applications
that demand all ﬁve desiderata. We do this by showing
that leading methods fail on an experiment that uses all ﬁve
desiderata, while they look good on experiments that use
just a subset. Second, we show that existing evaluations are
biased towards prior-focused approaches. Third, we suggest
two further experimental set-ups.
6.1. Experimental approach
We consider representatives of the prior-focused approach,
likelihood-focused approach, and a hybrid approach. We
use these to demonstrate the shortcomings of existing evalu-
ations and to tease out which aspects of the architecture are
challenged under different experimental design choices.
We use three variants of VCL because it has the clearest
Bayesian interpretation. First, we use pure VCL without
a coreset, exactly as described by Nguyen et al. (2018)
(see Appendix A). Second, we use a small coreset of 40
datapoints extracted from each dataset (we use their k-center
coreset approach, but this does not have a large effect). The
second method is the same as pure VCL except that, at the
end of training on each task, the model is trained on the
coresets before testing, as described in their work. This
reﬂects a hybrid approach. Third, we use a ‘coreset only’
approach as a likelihood-focused version. It is exactly like
the second variant except that the prior used for variational
inference is the initial prior each time—it is not updated
after each task.1
We use two further baselines to show that the effects we
ﬁnd are not an artefact of VCL speciﬁcally. EWC (Kirk-
patrick et al., 2017) is used as a prior-focused alternative to
VCL because it has been widely discussed in the literature.
1This is not the coreset only algorithm used in Nguyen et al.
(2018). Theirs is seeing only coresets—much less data—which is
why it performs badly on even the ﬁrst task.
1 2 3 4 5t'th model
0.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
VGR
VCL+core
VCL
Core only
EWCFigure 2. Single-headed Split MNIST. This experiment meets all
core desiderata and shows big performance differences.
1 2 3 4 5t'th model
0.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
VGR
VCL+core
VCL
Core only
EWC
Figure 3. Single-headed Split Fashion MNIST. The harder
dataset shows the prior-approximation starting to deteriorate, but
does not change performance ranking.
VGR (Farquhar and Gal, 2018b) is used as a more power-
ful likelihood-focused alternative to coresets. VGR, VCL
and its variants use a Bayesian neural network (BNN) and
variational inference, while EWC does not, so performance
comparisons between these architectures should be inter-
preted carefully. The fact that our observations for VCL and
its variants are mirrored for EWC supports our hypothesis,
based on our analysis, that the problems discussed in this
section affect prior-focused approaches in general.
6.2. Experiments With All Five Desiderata Show Big
Performance Differences
We use Single-headed Split MNIST, described in x5.2. This
satisﬁes all main desiderata from x3. It reveals major differ-
ences in performance between the approaches (see ﬁgures
2 and 3). The performance of VCL with coreset appears to
be entirely driven by the presence of the coresets. When
coresets are removed, VCL alone completely forgets old
tasks—its accuracy comes from correctly classifying the
most recent task only. EWC performs exactly like VCL,
suggesting that it is prior-focused approaches in general
that are struggling. Meanwhile VGR, the more accurate
likelihood-focused approach, is the only method that per-
forms nearly perfectly. Using FashionMNIST rather than
MNIST is harder and a worthwhile additional test, but does
not reveal a radically different story. VCL performs much
worse on FashionMNIST than VGR even though both use
the same model. It seems the prior approximation struggles
with data complexity more than the GAN.
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
1 2 3 4 5t'th model
0.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
VGR
VCL+core
VCL
Core only
EWC
Figure 4. Multi-headed Split MNIST. All methods succeed.
1 2 3 4 5t'th model
0.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
VGR
VCL+core
VCL
Core only
EWC
Figure 5. Multi-headed Split FashionMNIST. All perform sim-
ilarly, so no clean differentiation. VCL performs slightly worse
without coresets.
6.3. Missing Desiderata Create Blindspots
Having shown that there are big differences in performance
between our baselines on a well-constructed experiment
that follows all desiderata, we now show that experiments
that do not include all desiderata can fail to reveal these
important performance differences. This means that these
experimental evaluations can be misleading. The fact that
they systematically hide shortcomings of prior-focused ap-
proaches suggests that the evaluations are inadvertently bi-
asing research efforts in the ﬁeld. We use MNIST and
FashionMNIST to show that while using more complex
datasets does improve evaluations, it does not make up for
unrepresentative experimental design.
6.3.1. N O CROSS -TASK RESEMBLANCE
As we argue inx5.1, Permuted MNIST is unusual in that
there is no resemblance between images in each task that
might cause conﬁdent incorrect predictions. Previous au-
thors have demonstrated the effectiveness of their meth-
ods on Permuted MNIST (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Nguyen
et al., 2018). Virtually any continual learning method pro-
posed has shown good performance on this task. This
demonstrates the weakness of experiments that do not re-
ﬂect desideratum A. Further experimental investigation of
these phenomena is in Appendix B.1 with baseline results
in Appendix B.2.
6.3.2. N O SHARED OUTPUT HEAD
Authors frequently use a multi-headed version of Split
MNIST, following Zenke et al. (2017), which we describe
inx4.2.2. On this evaluation, all approaches look similarly
1 2 3 4 5t'th model
0.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
VGR
VCL+core
VCL
Core only
EWCFigure 6. Test-time Knowledge Split MNIST. All succeed.
1 2 3 4 5t'th model
0.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
VGR
VCL+core
VCL
Core only
EWC
Figure 7. Test-time Knowledge Split FashionMNIST. The ex-
periment is harder but still does not cleanly differentiate prior-
and likelihood-focused methods.
good (see ﬁgures 4 and 5). This shows that multi-heading,
and neglecting desideratum B, can create misleading ex-
periments. Details of training and hyperparameters can be
found in Appendix B.4.
6.3.3. T EST-TIME TASK KNOWLEDGE
Instead of entirely separate heads for each task, one might
simply know which output classes to look at during testing.
In this variant, which breaks desideratum C, everything is
exactly the same as for the single-headed variant during
training, but during testing all outputs except those for the
correct class are masked with zeros before the most probable
class is selected. Here, both on MNIST and FashionMNIST
the evaluation does not differentiate the performance of
prior- and likelihood-focused methods (see ﬁgures 6 and 7).
6.3.4. R ETRAINING ON OLD TASKS
An experimental evaluation that is exactly like single-headed
Split MNIST except that the tasks are looped through several
times does still ﬁnd that prior-focused methods perform
badly (see Appendix B.6). Neglecting this desideratum,
therefore, might not make evaluations biased, though it
is certainly not in keeping with the core motivations of
continual learning applications since it requires data to be
kept indeﬁnitely.
6.3.5. O NLY TWO TASKS
Many authors have tested their methods with only two tasks.
This is an interesting challenge, but signiﬁcantly simpler
than a longer series. Showing that a method succeeds on
a two-task transfer does not entail that it will work on a
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
longer series. For example, looking at the ﬁrst two tasks in
ﬁgure 2 would not differentiate VCL with coresets and VGR,
where looking at the longer series shows a clear difference
in performance.
6.4. Further Experimental Options
Having shown the importance of our ﬁve main desiderata in
experimental evaluations, we further suggest experiments
based on the extended desiderata listed in x3. The ﬁrst
tests the ability of the model to detect a change in task,
which has not yet been demonstrated in continual learning.
The second evaluates time against accuracy (or some other
metric) as a trade-off that must be carefully selected for
different settings.
6.4.1. M ODEL UNCERTAINTY ON UNSEEN TASKS
Model uncertainty gives another tool for understanding for-
getting. A good continual learning model should be more
certain on tasks it has seen before than unseen tasks. To test
the ability of model uncertainty to distinguish a task bound-
ary, we assess the uncertainty of the model, for each batch of
training, on data from the current task. We ﬁnd, for a model
trained using VGR, that model uncertainty spikes at the start
of each new task (see ﬁgure 8). This means that VGR, or
another method with sufﬁciently good model uncertainty
estimation, does not need to be told task boundaries. Before
each training epoch, we can compare the model uncertainty
on the new data to the previous running average uncertainty.
If the change in model uncertainty is above any sensible
cut-off threshold we see a task boundary has occurred and
trigger training of the generative model with a cache of
the previous epoch’s data. One could either cache the last
epoch’s data or train the generative model alongside the task
training, but either way task detection comes with some
additional memory and computational overheads. To mea-
sure uncertainty, we use the mutual information between
predictions on each task and the model posterior, following
Gal (2016).
6.4.2. T IME AND MEMORY
Timed Split MNIST evaluates the trade-off of training time
against accuracy in continual learning, rather than reporting
a single run-time. Much of the need for continual learn-
ing comes from situations where a system cannot feasibly
retrain on all previous data due to constraints of cost and
time. Architecture selection and hyperparameter selection,
therefore involve a tradeoff of performance and speed. For
example, in VGR, training on larger sampled datasets im-
proves performance but takes more time. In ﬁgure 9 we
show the average accuracy of various models plotted against
the wall-clock time taken to ﬁnish training for a wide range
of such hyper-parameters. While it is good to report the time
0 250 500 750 1000
Batches020004000UncertaintyFigure 8. Mutual Information on FashionMNIST with VGR.
Uncertainty spikes at the start of each new task (black dotted
line), allowing task boundary detection. Uncertainty is assessed
using the mutual information between predictions on each task and
the model posterior.
0 1000 2000 3000
Wall clock time (s)0.250.500.751.00Accuracy
VGR
VCL+core
Figure 9. Timed Single-headed Split MNIST. Hyperparameter
choice can lead to slower, more accurate, models for each architec-
ture. Ideal performance is in the top left corner. VGR is accurate
but slower than VCL.
taken by the most accurate model from one approach, rep-
resenting the trade-offs within each approach gives a fairer
reﬂection of the costs and beneﬁts of each method. None of
the conﬁgurations of VCL provides good accuracy on the
single-headed task. At the same time, none of the conﬁgu-
rations of VGR is able to provide good time performance
(see Appendix B.7.1 for further details and hyperparameter
choices).
7. Discussion
Experimental design shapes the ﬁeld by providing repro-
ducible comparisons between architectures, and testing
whether an architecture satisﬁes fundamental objectives. Ac-
cidental blindspots in existing evaluations have created mis-
leading comparisons in recent research. When experiments
better reﬂect the continual learning problem, recent leading
approaches fail even on simple datasets like MNIST. Using
more realistic datasets is important, but until we improve
the experimental design, the ﬁeld will only show illusory
progress on those datasets, without overcoming fundamen-
tal challenges inherent to continual learning itself. Authors
of new papers currently feel compelled by the reviewing
process to assess new methods on the same, incomplete,
evaluations used by old papers. This paper reﬂects an at-
tempt to reassess the experimental foundations of continual
learning and provide a new direction for future work.
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
References
Charles Blundell, Julien Cornebise, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
and Daan Wierstra. Weight Uncertainty in Neural Net-
works. Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference
on Machine Learning , 37:1613–1622, 2015. 4.1
Yaroslav Bulatov. notMNIST dataset, 2011. URL http:
//yaroslavvb.com/upload/notMNIST/ . 1
Arslan Chaudhry, Puneet K. Dokania, Thalaiyasingam Ajan-
than, and Philip H. S. Torr. Riemannian Walk for Incre-
mental Learning: Understanding Forgetting and Intran-
sigence. Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision , 11215:556–572, 2018. 1, 4.1, 4.2.2,
4.2.4, 5.2, A.1
Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach,
and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efﬁcient Lifelong Learning
with A-GEM. International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2019. 4.2.1, 4.2.4
Natalia Diaz-Rodriguez, Vincenzo Lomonaco, David Filliat,
and Davide Maltoni. Don’t forget, there is more than for-
getting: new metrics for Continual Learning. Continual
Learning Workshop at NeurIPS , October 2018. 4.2.4
Jeff Donahue, Yangqing Jia, Oriol Vinyals, Judy Hoffman,
Ning Zhang, Eric Tzeng, and Trevor Darrell. DeCAF:
A Deep Convolutional Activation Feature for Generic
Visual Recognition. Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Machine Learning , 31:647–655, 2014. A.5
Sebastian Farquhar and Yarin Gal. Differentially Private
Continual Learning. Privacy in Machine Learning and
AI workshop at ICML , 2018a. 4.2.4
Sebastian Farquhar and Yarin Gal. A Unifying Bayesian
View of Continual Learning. Bayesian Deep Learning
Workshop at NeurIPS , page 6, 2018b. 4.1, 6.1, A.4, B.2,
B.3
Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Charles Blundell, Yori
Zwols, David Ha, Andrei A. Rusu, Alexander Pritzel, and
Daan Wierstra. PathNet: Evolution Channels Gradient
Descent in Super Neural Networks. arXiv , 2017. A.5
Yarin Gal. Uncertainty in Deep Learning. PhD Thesis , 2016.
6.4.1
Ian J. Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Da Xiao, Aaron Courville,
and Yoshua Bengio. An Empirical Investigation of Catas-
trophic Forgetting in Gradient-Based Neural Networks.
arXiv , 2013a. 4.2.1, A.1, A.5
Ian J. Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Da Xiao, Aaron Courville,
and Yoshua Bengio. An Empirical Investigation of Catas-
trophic Forgetting in Gradient-Based Neural Networks.
arXiv , 2013b. arXiv: 1312.6211 Citation Key: Goodfel-
low2013. 5.1Alex Graves. Practical Variational Inference for Neural
Networks. Neural Information Processing Systems , 2011.
B.2
Wenpeng Hu, Zhou Lin, Bing Liu, Chongyang Tao, Zheng-
wei Tao, Jinwen Ma, Dongyan Zhao, and Rui Yan. Over-
coming Catastrophic Forgetting via Model Adaptation.
International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2019. 4.1, 4.2.1, 4.2.2
Ferenc Huszar. Note on the quadratic penalties in elas-
tic weight consolidation. PNAS , 115(11):E2496–E2497,
2018. 4.1, B.3
Heechul Jung, Jeongwoo Ju, Minju Jung, and Junmo
Kim. Less-forgetting Learning in Deep Neural Networks.
arXiv , 2016. 4.2.3, A.5
Diederik P. Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Vari-
ational Dropout and the Local Reparameterization Trick.
Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pages 2575–2583, 2015. B.2
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel
Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A. Rusu, Kieran
Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-
Barwinska, Demis Hassabis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan
Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic
forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences , 114(13):3521–3526, March
2017. 1, 2, 4.1, 4.2.1, 5.3, 6.1, 6.3.1, A.1
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features
from Tiny Images. Technical report, 2009. 1
Yann LeCun, Leon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick
Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document
recognition. IEEE , 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. 1
Sang-woo Lee, Jin-hwa Kim, Jaehyun Jun, Jung-woo Ha,
and Byoung-tak Zhang. Overcoming Catastrophic For-
getting by Incremental Moment Matching. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. 4.2.1, A.5
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without Forget-
ting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence , 2017. 4.1, 4.2.3, A.5
Vincenzo Lomonaco and Davide Maltoni. Core50: a new
dataset and benchmark for continuous object recognition.
arxiv , 2017. 3, 4.2.4
David Lopez-paz and Marc’Aurelio Aurelio Ranzato. Gra-
dient Episodic Memory for Continual Learning. Pro-
ceedings of the 31st Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems , 31, 2017. 4.1, 4.2.1, 4.2.4
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
David J. C. MacKay. A Practical Bayesian Framework for
Backpropagation Networks. Neural Computation , 4(3):
448–472, 1992. 4.1
Radford M. Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks .
PhD thesis, University of Toronto, 1995. 4.1
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bis-
sacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y . Ng. Reading Digits in
Natural Images with Unsupervised Feature Learning. In
NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning and Unsupervised
Feature Learning , 2011. 4.2.3
Cuong V . Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D. Bui, and
Richard E. Turner. Variational Continual Learning. Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
1, 2, 3, 4.1, 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 5, 6.1, 1, 6.3.1, A.3, A.4, B.2,
B.3, B.4
B. Pfulb and A. Gepperth. A comprehensive, application-
oriented study of catastrophic forgetting in DNNs. In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,
September 2018. 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 5.3, B.5
Ali Sharif Razavian, Hossein Azizpour, Josephine Sullivan,
and Stefan Carlsson. CNN features off-the-shelf: An
astounding baseline for recognition. IEEE Computer So-
ciety Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition Workshops , pages 512–519, 2014. A.5
Hippolyt Ritter, Aleksandar Botev, and David Barber. On-
line Structured Laplace Approximations For Overcoming
Catastrophic Forgetting. arXiv , 2018. 1, 4.1, 4.2.1, 4.2.2,
5, A.1
Anthony Robins. Catastrophic Forgetting, Rehearsal and
Pseudorehearsal. Connection Science , 7(2):123–146,
1995. ISSN 13600494. 4.1
Andrei A. Rusu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins,
Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive Neural
Networks. arXiv , 2016. 4.1, A.5
Jonathan Schwarz, Daniel Altman, Andrew Dudzik, Oriol
Vinyals, Yee Whye Teh, and Razvan Pascanu. Towards
a natural benchmark for continual learning. Continual
Learning Workshop at NeurIPS , page 13, 2018a. 3, 4.2.4
Jonathan Schwarz, Jelena Luketina, Wojciech M. Czarnecki,
Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Yee Whye Teh, Razvan
Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progress & Compress: A
scalable framework for continual learning. arXiv , 2018b.
2, 3, 4.2.4
Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim.
Continual Learning with Deep Generative Replay. Ad-
vances In Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
2994–3003, 2017. 4.1, 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Jonathan Masci, Sohrob Kazerou-
nian, Faustino Gomez, and Jrgen Schmidhuber. Compete
to Compute. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 2310–2318, 2013. A.5
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland V ollgraf. Fashion-
MNIST: a Novel Image Dataset for Benchmarking Ma-
chine Learning Algorithms. arXiv:1708.07747 [cs, stat] ,
August 2017. 1
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lip-
son. How transferable are features in deep neural net-
works? Advances In Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 3320–3328, 2014. A.5
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Contin-
ual Learning Through Synaptic Intelligence. Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pages 3987–3995, 2017. 1, 4.1, 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 5, 6.3.2,
A.2
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
Appendices
A. Further Prior Work
A.1. Elastic Weight Consolidation
Unlike VCL, EWC uses an ordinary neural networks with
anL2regularization term added to the loss. This regular-
ization reﬂects a Gaussian prior for each parameter. At the
end of training on each dataset, EWC (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017) estimates the contribution each parameter makes to
the gradient of the loss by approximating the Hessian of the
likelihoods with:
Ft/NtX
n=1
r!logp(y(n)
tj!;x(n)
t)2
!=!t
This approximate Fisher information matrix is estimated at
the end of each task. This implicitly sets the covariance of
the parameter prior (which is assumed to be diagonal). The
authors state that in the multi-task case the regularization
term for task Tis the sum of separate regularization terms
for each past dataset Dt.
Chaudhry et al. (2018) provide a generalization of both SI
and EWC. Ritter et al. (2018) extend EWC by relaxing
the assumption that the covariance matrix of the parameter
distributions is diagonal.
Kirkpatrick et al. (2017) show EWC works well on the Per-
muted MNIST task introduced by Goodfellow et al. (2013a).
They also show that EWC reduces forgetting on a succession
of Atari games.
A.2. Synaptic Intelligence
Published soon after EWC, SI has a similar loss but com-
putes the contribution of each parameter to the gradient
of the loss over the entire course of training. The authors
explicitly acknowledge that the derivation of their regular-
ization term only extends to the two-task case, but point out
that the model performs well even in multi-task settings.
Zenke et al. (2017) show that SI works in a multi-headed
version of the Split MNIST task which they introduce, and
matches EWC on the Permuted MNIST task. They also
show some transfer learning on a multi-headed split CIFAR
task of their own design.
A.3. Variational Continual Learning
Nguyen et al. (2018) motivate their regularization through
VI. They argue that the posterior of the parameter distribu-
tion after learning a task should be the prior when learning
the next task. They calculate the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence between the current distribution and the previousposterior. This is in contrast with the more usual Variational
Free Energy (VFE) loss which uses the KL divergence to a
constant prior that is not updated after each task. The KL
divergence can be represented approximately as a quadratic
regularization with rotation, just like the two approaches
above, as Nguyen et al. (2018) point out.
In addition to the Variational Continual Learning (VCL) reg-
ularization term, Nguyen et al. (2018) add a coreset which
samples examples from old datasets, which are withheld
from the main dataset. Rather than discarding all of an old
dataset, as EWC and SI do, only the vast majority (about
99.7%) is discarded. Before being evaluated, the model is
trained against the coreset. For multi-headed settings (see
x5.2) coresets train each head separately.
Nguyen et al. (2018) show that VCL with or without the use
of coresets outperforms both SI and EWC on the Permuted
MNIST task. They show that VCL outperforms EWC and
SI on the multi-headed Split MNIST task and on a very
similar task with notMNIST. They take advantage of the
VI setting to show reduced uncertainty in a generative task
based on MNIST and notMNIST.
A.4. Variational Generative Replay
Each of VCL, EWC, and SI effectively set the parameters
at the end of the last task as a prior, which is explicit in
the Variational Inference (VI) derivation supporting VCL
(Nguyen et al., 2018). Instead of changing priors between
tasks, VGR adapts the log-likelihood component of the loss
to depend on past datasets (Farquhar and Gal, 2018b). VGR
estimates the log-likelihood component of the loss on past
tasks using generative models. They train a DC-GAN at the
end of each task on all of the classes that appeared in that
task. Then, at the start of training a new task, they sample
from all stored GANs training points, which are then mixed
into the real training data.
A.5. Dynamic architecture approaches
Other work, which is not our focus, has also made progress
with continual learning. Progressive neural networks (Rusu
et al., 2016) conditions the newest model on the outputs of
old, stored, models. Some approaches split the network into
regions that have different roles. In Li and Hoiem (2017)
one set of shared parameters governs a feature extraction
component while each task is given parameters on top of
that component. During training, the combined shared and
old task networks are encouraged to classify similarly to a
stored old version of the model, while the combined shared
and new task networks are trained on the new task. Jung
et al. (2016) stochastically freeze the ﬁnal layer to encourage
lower layers to extract features from all tasks that the ﬁnal
layer can use to classify. Others have semi- or fully-ﬁxed
a shared part of a network with task-speciﬁc layers on top
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
ENTROPY
Split 0:003
Permuted 0:453
Figure 10. Average entropy of predictions on Task B, early in train-
ing; Note the 2 orders of magnitude difference between the two
settings. Entropy is much higher in the Permuted setting.
(Razavian et al., 2014; Yosinski et al., 2014; Donahue et al.,
2014). PathNet uses evolutionary selection to try to learn
which patches of a larger network are helpful to each task
rather than making a layer-by-layer assumption (Fernando
et al., 2017). This broad family of approaches are especially
useful in two-task transfer cases, but it can become imprac-
tical to introduce the many task-speciﬁc weights in the more
general continual learning case that we consider.
Others ﬁnd that adjustments to learning dynamics can re-
duce catastrophic forgetting, presumably by encouraging
networks to use their capacity fully. This family of ap-
proaches includes selecting activations and using dropout to
reduce forgetting (Srivastava et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al.,
2013a). These are useful, but do not go far enough to solve
forgetting fully. Lee et al. (2017) extend dropout by shifting
the zero-point of each dropout parameter to the parameter
value from training on the previous task.
B. Experimental Details and Further Figures
B.1. Shortcomings of Permuted MNIST
Although our work mostly aims to show that architectures
which succeed on a Permuted MNIST task can fail in slightly
different settings, we also carried out some investigations
as to why this might be. We observe that in most settings, a
model will conﬁdently predict that an example from the new
datasetDtis from a class that was in Dt 1. This conﬁdent
but false prediction creates large gradients in the output
layer. The derivative of the likelihood term in the loss with
respect to each output weight wkin the output layer of a
model is@L
@ok=pk ykwhereykis thek’th entry of a
one-hot vector of labels and pkis the probability predicted
for classk. This gradient is therefore biggest for conﬁdent
but false predictions. In the permuted setting, however,
no example fromDtlooks remotely like an example from
Dt 1. This means the model makes unconﬁdent predictions
and the gradients stemming from the likelihood term of the
loss are unusually small. This may on its own be enough to
explain part of the difference in the settings.
We may be able to probe more deeply. For prior-focused
continual learning, the loss function is separated into a prior
term and a likelihood term (c.f. eq. (1)). By examining
this separation, we can see why the permuted setting, with
unusually small likelihood-term gradients, is a best casescenario for prior-focused continual learning. The prior
term is data-independent and has the same magnitude no
matter how incorrectly conﬁdent the model is when mak-
ing predictions on Dt. The likelihood term of the gradient,
however, has a much larger magnitude when conﬁdent but
false predictions are made. This means that in a typical
setting the likelihood term of the loss dominates the prior
early in training. In the permuted setting, however, the prior
term is relevant throughout the training. This means that the
prior-focused approaches are able to succeed in a permuted
setting but fail in other settings. Two points are worth not-
ing. First, if the prior term were to fully the capture correct
class of models, its size will change appropriately, and this
effect would not exist. But in practice our priors are restric-
tive approximations. Second, the gradients in earlier layers
are less straightforward to analyse. However, especially
early in training, output layer gradients are several orders of
magnitude larger than gradients in early layers. Moreover,
our argument only depends on showing that the Permuted
setting protects the prior-focused loss from systematic large
mis-estimates for an important subset of its gradients.
We introduce two tests to show the shortcomings of the Per-
muted MNIST experiment discussed in x5.1. For each test
we consider both the Permuted and Split settings. In each
case, we train a model on Task A before training on Task B.
In the split setting, Task A is the ﬁrst ﬁve digits of MNIST
and Task B the last ﬁve digits. In the permuted setting,
Task A is MNIST and Task B is a random permutation of
the pixels of MNIST. Here, we are assessing the evaluation
framework itself, not continual learning performance.
B.1.1. V ERIFYING PERMUTED SETTING
UNDER -CONFIDENCE
We ﬁrst validate our hypothesis that predictions are much
more uniform in the Permuted setting. We evaluate the
entropy of the output probability vector. Low entropy indi-
cates a conﬁdent prediction of a single class, whereas a high
entropy indicates a ‘uniform’ prediction, spreading the mass
across different classes. These are summarised in Table 10,
supporting our claim that models in the Permuted setting
are much less conﬁdent than in a more typical setting.
B.1.2. V ERIFYING UNUSUALLY LARGE GRADIENTS IN
THE PERMUTED SETTING
Next, we test our hypothesis from x5.1 that more uniform
predictions lead to slower ‘catastrophic forgetting’. To test
this hypothesis, after training on Task A, we measured gra-
dients for the ﬁnal weight layer while training Task B in
the two variants (ﬁgure 11). All results are averaged over
100 runs. Full experimental details are in Appendix B.1.3.
We found that having digits resembling previously observed
ones in the Split setting led to much larger likelihood-term
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
5 10 15
Batches0.0250.0500.0750.100Mean abs likelihood gradsPermuted
Split
Figure 11. Early in training Task B, the likelihood term of gradients
on the ﬁnal layer is unusually low in the Permuted setting because
permuted digits do not resemble any digits from Task A. This
makes continual learning unrealistically easy in this evaluation.
Averaged over 100 runs, shading is one standard deviation.
5 10 15
Batches0500010000Mean abs grad ratioPermuted
Split
Figure 12. Early in training Task B, the ratio of the likelihood term
of gradients the ﬁnal layer against the prior term is much lower in
the Permuted setting. This reduces forgetting because the prior has
a larger impact on learning. Averaged over 100 runs, shading is
one standard deviation.gradients in the ﬁnal layer than found in the Permuted set-
ting for early batches. As a result, the ratio between the
likelihood term and the prior term of the loss is much higher
in the Split setting (ﬁgure 12). This means that the prior
has a smaller inﬂuence over the gradients, leading to more
forgetting.
B.1.3. E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS FOR THE ABOVE
GRADIENT ANALYSIS
To measure the gradients during training, we ﬁrst trained on
Task A for 120 epochs with batch size 256 and an Adam
optimizer using Variational Continual Learning (VCL) with
the same settings used in B.2. We then trained on Task
B for 15 batches of 16 digits each, again using VCL. We
measured the average absolute value of the gradients of the
ﬁnal layer of the model. We averaged over 100 training
runs for each setting (with a different permutation each time
in the Permuted setting), resetting the model to its initial
position after each run. Graphs show the standard deviation
of the average gradient of each batch. The ratio displayed
in ﬁgure 12 is the log-likelihood term of the loss described
in equation 1 divided by the prior term, using VCL. The
ratio is calculated for each of the 100 runs on the averaged
absolute gradients.
B.1.4. I NVESTIGATING THE HYPOTHESIS THAT THE
PRIOR TERM IS OVERLY SMALL
In order to investigate whether the prior-term of the gradient
is overly small in the Split setting relative to the Permuted
setting, we tried training a VCL model on Single-headed
Split MNIST with an artiﬁcially upweighted prior-term in
the cost. We experimented with factors of 1 (the default
case), 10, 100, and 1000. We also tried upweighting the
prior-term only during the ﬁrst few epochs. In no case
did we ﬁnd that this improved performance signiﬁcantly.
This suggests that it is not only the magnitude, but also the
direction, of the prior gradient which is inaccurate in the
split setting.
B.2. Permuted MNIST as Baseline
As Nguyen et al. (2018) have shown, on Permuted MNIST,
described inx5.1, VCL performs well with or without a core-
set. We further show that the coreset on its own performs
badly (ﬁgure 13, results averaged over 10 runs). This is
consistent with our analysis of the Permuted setting, which
suggested that the small and evenly spread gradients due
to the likelihood term of the loss helped the prior term to
work, despite a prior that does not fully support the function
space. Note that this version of VCL was previously shown
to outperform EWC and SI (Nguyen et al., 2018).
For permuted MNIST, we follow Nguyen et al. (2018) where
possible. We use a Bayesian neural network (Graves, 2011)
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
12345678910t'th model
0.50.60.70.80.91.0Accuracy
VGR
VCL+core
VCL
Core only
Figure 13. Permuted MNIST. VGR has marginally better perfor-
mance than VCL with or without a coreset, which has been shown
to outperform EWC and SI. Coresets without the VCL loss per-
forms worse. Averaged over 10 runs.
with two hidden layers of 100 units with ReLu activations.
The priors are initialized as a unit Gaussian and the parame-
ters are initialized with the mean of a pre-trained maximum
likelihood model and a small initial variance ( 10 6). We
use the Adam optimizer (Kingma et al., 2015) with learning
rate10 3. We use a single head, again following Nguyen
et al. (2018). For all results we present the average over
10 runs, with a different permutation each time. Standard
errors are not shown as they are under a tenth of a percent.
We train for 100 epochs using a batch size of 256 on all
the data except the with-held coresets. We train the whole
single head on coresets for 100 epochs and use 200 digits
of each permutation as a coreset chosen using the same
k-center coresets algorithm used by Nguyen et al. (2018).
VCL without coresets is exactly the same, but without a
ﬁnal training step on coresets. The coresets only algorithm
is exactly the same as VCL, except that the prior is always
initialized as though it were the ﬁrst task.
Following Farquhar and Gal (2018b) where possible, we
train VGR for 120 epochs using a GAN trained for 200
epochs on each MNIST digit. We use 6000 generated digits
per class, sampled fresh for each task, and initialize network
weights using the previous task. We use a batch size of 256
times the number of seen tasks, ensuring that the number of
batches is held constant. The GAN is trained with an Adam
optimizer with learning rate 210 4and1of0:5. The
network has four fully-connected hidden layers with 256,
512, 1024 and 784 weights respectively. It uses Leaky ReLu
withof 0.2.
B.3. Experimental Settings for Single-headed Split
MNIST
The settings for Split MNIST follow Nguyen et al. (2018)
where possible. For Bayesian neural network architectures,
we use exactly the same settings as for Permuted MNIST,
including the single head, except that each hidden layer has256 weights, similarly to Nguyen et al. (2018) on their multi-
headed Split MNIST. Results are shown averaged over 10
runs, with a different coreset selection each time. Standard
errors are not shown as they are of the order of a tenth of a
percent.
For all Bayesian neural network architectures we train for
120 epochs. We use batch sizes equal to the training set size.
We use coresets of digits per task selected using the same
k-center coreset algorithm as Nguyen et al. (2018), which
are withheld from the training. We train for 120 epochs on
the concatenated coreset across all the heads together.
Following Farquhar and Gal (2018b) where possible, for
VGR we use 6000 digits per class generated by a convo-
lutional GAN. Unlike VCL, we cap batch sizes at 30,000
rather than having the batch size equal the training set size.
The GAN is trained for 50 epochs on each MNIST class
using the same optimizer as the non-convolutional GAN
used for Permuted MNIST. It has a fully connected layer
followed by two convolutional layers with 64 and 1 chan-
nel(s) and 5x5 convolutions. Each convolutional layer is
preceded by a 2x2 up-sampling layer. The activations are
Leaky ReLu’s with of0:2.
For EWC, we use a neural network with two hidden lay-
ers with 256 weights. We train using the variant of EWC
suggested in Huszar (2018). We estimate the Fisher infor-
mation using 200 samples at the end of each task, train using
SGD with learning rate 10 2for 20 epochs per task. The
coefﬁcient of the regularization term in the loss was set to
10 but was found not to be important to performance.
B.4. Experimental Settings for Multi-headed Split
MNIST
Multi-headed Split MNIST has almost precisely the same
settings as the Single-headed Split MNIST above. Follow-
ing Nguyen et al. (2018), for VCL we have ﬁve heads in
the ﬁnal layer, each of which is trained separately. Coresets
are used to train each head in turn. Batch size equal is to
training set size. Results are shown averaged over 10 runs
with fresh coreset selection each time. Standard errors are
not shown as they are of the order of a tenth of a percent.
EWC is conﬁgured in exactly the same way as in the single-
headed setting.
B.5. Experimental Settings for Split Fashion MNIST
Single- and multi-headed Split Fashion MNIST are per-
formed mostly the same as our Split MNIST experiments.
We use a larger network, with four hidden layers with 200
units for the BNN and 256 units for EWC. Fashion MNIST
has a much more diverse membership of its classes, which
makes performance lower even with these larger networks.
We deliberately did not optimize hyperparameters, given the
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
5 10 15 20 25t'th model
0.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy
VCL+core
VCL
Core only
Figure 14. Retraining MNIST. With retraining, single-headed
Split MNIST is still able to differentiate likelihood-focused and
prior-focused approaches.
observation of Pfulb and Gepperth (2018) concerning causal-
ity. However, once hyperparameters were set, we explored
somewhat and found that using larger coresets and networks
could improved performance slightly, but not dramatically.
For VGR, the DC-GAN followed the implementation at
https://github.com/carpedm20/DCGAN-tensorﬂow
B.6. Split MNIST with Retraining
To test the impact of retraining, we allowed ourselves to
cycle through all the data 5 times, which is roughly what
previous authors who have made use of retraining have done.
Instead of ﬁnishing at the end of the ﬁfth task, we begin
fresh (keeping all coresets if applicable). We ﬁnd that even
with retraining, single-headed Split MNIST is still able to
differentiate prior- and likelihood-focused approaches (see
ﬁgure 14). This suggests that experiments with retraining
may not be misleading in that they make models that fail
look as though they work, though it certainly conﬂicts with
some of the use cases that motivate continual learning. For
these experiments, we reduced the number of epochs trained
per task from 120 to 10, but other settings are the same.
B.7. Timed Single-headed Split MNIST
We perform the single-headed Split MNIST experiment
with a range of different conﬁgurations. For VGR we allow
between 10 and 50 epochs for training the convolutional
GANs and between 1 and 120 epochs for training the main
model. We use 2000, 4000, or 6000 generated images per
class. We add GAN training time to the main ﬁgure, even
though it is possible to do in parallel. For VCL, we use
between 1 and 120 epochs for training and coresets. In all
cases, we report elapsed wall-clock time from start to ﬁnish.
We plot this against average accuracy over all tasks of the
ﬁnal model trained on all tasks. In all cases, the experiment
was carried out on an NVIDIA Tesla K80.
1000 2000 3000
Wall clock time (s)0.80.91.0Accuracy
VGR
VCL+coreFigure 15. Multi-headed Timed Split MNIST. Ideal perfor-
mance is in the top left corner. VGR can reach good accuracy,
but slower than VCL. Now that VCL can use multi-headed train-
ing as well as coresets, the accuracy is good in the multi-headed
experiment.
Here, we also show Timed Split MNIST performed as a
multi-headed experiment in order to allow VCL to use multi-
headed training (ﬁgure 15). Performance is better for all
models than in the single-headed case, but for VCL it can
get very good, and faster than VGR.
B.7.1. TIME AND MEMORY EFFICIENCY OF PRIOR -AND
LIKELIHOOD -FOCUSED APPROACHES
Likelihood-focused approaches must train generative mod-
els and train on extra data relative to prior-focused ap-
proaches. But prior-focused approaches tend have slightly
more complicated losses or add extra training phases. We
found that VCL with coreset was faster than VGR. For the
single-headed Split MNIST task it took roughly 7 minutes.2
Training VGR with each generated set the same size as
the true data took roughly 18 minutes plus 34 minutes to
train the GANs. But a quicker training regime took only 2
minutes plus 8 for training GANs and was still more accu-
rate than VCL.3The prior-focused costs scale badly with
model size, while VGR’s costs scale badly with data-space
complexity and very long series of datasets. VGR is also
potentially less memory intensive. Generated data can be
sampled on demand, it need not be the same each epoch.
B.8. A Simpler Model Uncertainty Experiment
It is possible to measure the quality of model uncertainty
for continual learning without tracking throughout train-
ing. After training on each task, we measure the model’s
uncertainty when shown data from each task, both seen
and unseen (see ﬁgures 18 and 19). We then set an uncer-
tainty threshold, when the uncertainty is above this value
2Times are reported for a Nvidia Tesla K80.
3Average single-headed accuracy of the ﬁnal model for this
less-trained VGR was 90% rather than 96% for the fully trained
model. Training used one third the generated data, only 20 epochs
of training, and only a ﬁfth the training for the GAN.
Towards Robust Evaluations of Continual Learning
1 2 3 4 5
Dataset t'0.00.51.0Uncertainty
Post.
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 16. Mutual Information MNIST VGR. Uncertainty is
high for unseen tasks, and low for all previously seen tasks, show-
ing good calibration. Models trained on 1-5 tasks are each evalu-
ated against all ﬁve tasks. Uncertainty is assessed using the mutual
information between predictions on each task and the model pos-
terior. It is normalized to 1 for the most uncertain task for each
model.
1 2 3 4 5
Dataset t'0.00.51.0Uncertainty
Post.
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 17. Mutual Information MNIST VCL. Uncertainty is
high for unseen tasks, but rises for seen tasks that were seen some
time ago. The fourth model, for example, is nearly as uncertain
about the second task, which it has seen, as it is about the ﬁfth,
which it has not.
we predict that the data was previously unseen. By varying
thresholds we generate an ROC plot. The area under the
curve (AUC) of the ROC plot is a measure for the ability
of the model to distinguish seen/unseen tasks. We compare
the AUC of both these ROC plots and ﬁnd that VGR’s AUC
is 1 while VCL’s is 0.76. This means that VGR is in princi-
ple able to correctly detect all tasks it has not seen before,
whereas VCL fails on a considerable number of those.
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
False positive rate0.00.20.40.60.81.0True positive rate
Figure 18. For VGR, sensible cut-off points cleanly differentiate
previously-seen tasks from unseen ones with no false positives.
This results in perfect recognition of previously seen tasks.
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
False positive rate0.00.20.40.60.81.0True positive rate
Figure 19. For VCL, false positives are a problem because the
model is highly uncertain about many previously-seen tasks. This
represents forgetting of old tasks.