Title: The Frontiers of Fairness in Machine Learning

arXiv:1810.08810v1  [cs.LG]  20 Oct 2018The Frontiers of Fairness in Machine Learning
Alexandra Chouldechova∗Aaron Roth†
January 11, 2022
Abstract
The last few years have seen an explosion of academic and popular int erest in algorithmic
fairness. Despite this interest and the volume and velocity of work t hat has been produced
recently, the fundamental science of fairness in machine learning is still in a nascent state. In
March 2018, we convened a group of experts as part of a CCC vision ing workshop to assess the
state of the ﬁeld, and distill the most promising research directions going forward. This report
summarizes the ﬁndings of that workshop. Along the way, it survey s recent theoretical work in
the ﬁeld and points towards promising directions for research.
1 Introduction
The last decade has seen a vast increase both in the diversity of applications to which machine
learning is applied, and to the import of those applications . Machine learning is no longer just
the engine behind ad placements and spam ﬁlters: it is now use d to ﬁlter loan applicants, deploy
police oﬃcers, and inform bail and parole decisions, amongs t other things. The result has been a
major concern for thepotential for datadriven methodsto in troduceandperpetuatediscriminatory
practices, and to otherwise be unfair. And this concern has not been without reason: a steady
stream of empirical ﬁndings has shown that data driven metho ds can unintentionally both encode
existinghumanbiases andintroducenewones(see e.g. [Swe1 3, BCZ+16, CBN17, BG18] fornotable
examples).
At the same time, the last two years have seen an unprecedente d explosion in interest from
the academic community in studying fairness and machine lea rning. “Fairness and transparency”
transformed from a niche topic with a trickle of papers produ ced every year (at least since the work
of [PRT08]) to a major subﬁeld of machine learning, complete with a dedicated archival conference
(ACM FAT*). But despite the volume and velocity of published work, our understanding of the
fundamental questions related to fairness and machine learning remain in its infan cy. What should
fairness mean? What are the causesthat introduce unfairness in machine learning? How best
should we modify our algorithms to avoid unfairness? And wha t are the corresponding tradeoﬀs
with which we must grapple?
In March 2018, we convened a group of about ﬁfty experts in Phi ladelphia, drawn from
academia, industry, and government, to asses the state of ou r understandingof the fundamentals of
the nascent scienceof fairness in machine learning, and to identify the unanswe red questions that
∗Heinz College, Carnegie Mellon University. achould@cmu.edu
†Department of Computer and Information Science, Universit y of Pennsylvania. aaroth@cis.upenn.edu
1
seem the most pressing. By necessity, the aim of the workshop was not to comprehensively cover
the vast growing ﬁeld, much of which is empirical. Instead, t he focus was on theoretical work aimed
at providing a scientiﬁc foundation for understanding algo rithmic bias. This document captures
several of the key ideas and directions discussed.
2 What We Know
2.1 Causes of Unfairness
Even before we precisely specify what we mean by “fairness”, we can identify common distortions
thatcanlead oﬀ-the-shelfmachinelearningtechniquestopr oducebehaviorthatisintuitively unfair.
These include:
1.Bias Encoded in Data : Often, the training data that we have on hand already includ es
human biases. For example, in the problem of recidivism pred iction used to inform bail and
parole decisions, the goal is to predict whether an inmate, i f released, will go on to commit
another crime within a ﬁxed period of time. But we do not have d ata on who commits crimes
— we have data on who is arrested. There is reason to believe th at arrest data — especially
for drug crimes — is skewed towards minority populations tha t are policed at a higher rate
[Rot14]. Of course, machine learning techniques are design ed to ﬁt the data, and so will
naturally replicate any bias already present in the data. Th ere is no reason to expect them
toremoveexisting bias.
2.Minimizing Average Error Fits Majority Populations : Diﬀerent populations of people
have diﬀerent distributions over features, and those featur es have diﬀerent relationships to
the label that we are trying to predict. As an example, consid er the task of predicting
college performance based on high school data. Suppose ther e is a majority population and
a minority population. The majority population employs SAT tutors and takes the exam
multiple times, reporting only the highest score. The minor ity population does not. We
should naturally expect both that SAT scores are higher amon gst the majority population,
and that their relationship to college performance is diﬀere ntly calibrated compared to the
minority population. But if we train a group-blind classiﬁe r to minimize overall error, if it
cannot simultaneously ﬁt both populations optimally, it wi ll ﬁt the majority population. This
is because — simply by virtue of their numbers — the ﬁt to the ma jority population is more
important to overall error than the ﬁt to the minority popula tion. This leads to a diﬀerent
(and higher) distribution of errors in the minority populat ion. This eﬀect can be quantiﬁed,
and can be partially alleviated via concerted data gatherin g eﬀorts [CJS18].
3.The Need to Explore : In many important problems, including recidivism predict ion and
drug trials, the data fed into the prediction algorithm depe nds on the actions that algorithm
has taken in the past. We only observe whether an inmate will r ecidivate if we release him .
We onlyobservetheeﬃcacy ofadrugonpatients towhomit isas signed. Learningtheory tells
us that in order to eﬀectively learn in such scenarios, we need toexplore— i.e. sometimes
take actions we believe to be sub-optimal in order to gather m ore data. This leads to at
least two distinct ethical questions. First, when are the in dividual costs of exploration borne
disproportionately by a certain sub-population? Second, i f in certain (e.g. medical) scenarios,
2
we view it as immoral to take actions we believe to be sub-opti mal for any particular patient,
how much does this slow learning, and does this lead to other s orts of unfairness?
2.2 Deﬁnitions of Fairness
With afew exceptions, the vast majority of work to date on fai rness in machine learning has focused
on the task of batch classiﬁcation. At a high level, this lite rature has focused on two main families
of deﬁnitions1:statistical notions of fairness and individual notions of fairness. We brieﬂy review
what is known about these approaches to fairness, their adva ntages, and their shortcomings.
2.2.1 Statistical Deﬁnitions of Fairness
Most of the literature on fair classiﬁcation focuses on statistical deﬁnitions of fairness. This
family of deﬁnitions ﬁxes a small number of protected demogr aphic groups G(such as racial
groups), and then ask for (approximate) parity of some stati stical measure across all of these
groups. Popular measures include raw positive classiﬁcati on rate, considered in work such as
[CV10, KAS11, DHP+12, FFM+15] (also sometimes known as statistical parity [DHP+12]), false
positive and false negative rates [Cho17, KMR17, HPS16, ZVG G17] (also sometimes known as
equalized odds [HPS16]), and positive predictive value [Ch o17, KMR17] (closely related to equal-
ized calibration when working with real valued risk scores) . There are others — see e.g. [BHJ+18]
for a more exhaustive enumeration. This family of fairness d eﬁnitions is attractive because it is
simple, and deﬁnitions from this family can be achieved with out making any assumptions on the
data and can be easily veriﬁed. However, statistical deﬁnit ions of fairness do not on their own give
meaningful guarantees to individuals or structured subgro ups of the protected demographic groups.
Instead they give guarantees to “average” members of the pro tected groups. (See [DHP+12] for a
litany of ways in which statistical parity and similar notio ns can fail to provide meaningful guar-
antees, and [KNRW18b] for examples of how some of these weakn esses carry over to deﬁnitions
which equalize false positive and negative rates.) Diﬀerent statistical measures of fairness can be
at odds with one another. For example, [Cho17] and [KMR17] pr ove a fundamental impossibility
result: except in trivial settings, it is impossible to simu ltaneously equalize false positive rates, false
negative rates, and positive predictive value across prote cted groups. Learning subject to statistical
fairness constraints can also be computationally hard [WGO S17], although practical algorithms of
various sorts are known [HPS16, ZVGG17, ABD+18].
2.2.2 Individual Deﬁnitions of Fairness
Individual notions of fairness, on the other hand, ask for co nstraints that bind on speciﬁc pairs
of individuals, rather than on a quantity that is averaged ov er groups. For example, [DHP+12]
give a deﬁnition which roughly corresponds to the constrain t that “similar individuals should be
treated similarly”, where similarity is deﬁned with respec t to a task-speciﬁc metric that must be
determined on a case by case basis. [JKMR16] suggest a deﬁnit ion which roughly corresponds to
“less qualiﬁed individuals should not be favored over more q ualiﬁed individuals”, where quality is
deﬁned with respect to the trueunderlying label (unknown to the algorithm). However, alth ough
1There is also an emerging line of work that considers causalnotions of fairness (see e.g., [KCP+17, KLRS17,
NS18]). We intentionally avoided discussions of this poten tially important direction because it will be the subject of
its own CCC visioning workshop.
3
the semantics of these kinds of deﬁnitions can be more meanin gful than statistical approaches to
fairness, the major stumbling block is that they seem to requ ire making signiﬁcant assumptions.
For example, the approach of [DHP+12] pre-supposes the existence of an agreed upon similarity
metric, whose deﬁnition would itself seemingly require sol ving a non-trivial problem in fairness,
and the approach of [JKMR16] seems to require strong assumpt ions on the functional form of the
relationship between features and labels in order to beusef ully put into practice. Theseobstacle are
serious enough that it remains unclear whether individual n otions of fairness can be made practical
— although attempting to bridge this gap is an important and o ngoing research agenda.
3 Questions at the Research Frontier
3.1 Between Statistical and Individual Fairness
Given the limitations of extant notions of fairness, is ther e a way to get some of the “best of
both worlds”? In other words, constraints that are practica lly implementable without the need
for making strong assumptions on the data or the knowledge of the algorithm designer, but which
nevertheless provide more meaningful guarantees to indivi duals? Two recent papers, [KNRW18b]
and [HJKRR18] (see also [KNRW18a, KGZ18] for empirical eval uations of the algorithms proposed
in these papers), attempt to do this by asking for statistica l fairness deﬁnitions to hold not just on
a small number of protected groups, but on an exponential or i nﬁnite class of groups deﬁned by
someclass of functions of boundedcomplexity. This approach seems promising: beca useultimately
they are asking for statistical notions of fairness, the app roaches proposed by these papers enjoy
the beneﬁts of statistical fairness: that no assumptions ne ed be made about the data, nor is
any external knowledge (like a fairness metric) needed. It a lso better addresses concerns about
“intersectionality”, a term used to describe how diﬀerent ki nds of discrimination can compound
and interact for individuals who fall at the intersection of several protected classes.
At the same time, the approach raises a number of additional q uestions: what function classes
are reasonable, and once one is decided upon (e.g. conjuncti ons of protected attribures) what
features should be “protected”? Should these only be attrib utes that are sensitive on their own,
like race and gender, or might attributes that are innocuous on their own correspond to groups we
wish to protect once we consider their intersection with pro tected attributes (for example clothing
styles intersected with race or gender)? Finally, this fami ly of approaches signiﬁcantly mitigates
some of the weaknesses of statistical notions of fairness by asking for the constraints to hold on
average not just over a small number of coarsely deﬁned group s, but over very ﬁnely deﬁned groups
as well. Ultimately, however, it inherits the weaknesses of statistical fairness as well, just on a more
limited scale.
Another recent line of work aims to weaken the strongest assu mption needed for the notion of
individual fairness from [DHP+12]: namely that the algorithm designer has perfect knowled ge of
a “fairness metric”. [KRR18] assume that the algorithm has a ccess to an oracle which can return
an unbiased estimator for the distance between two randomly drawn individuals according to an
unknown fairness metric, and show how to use this to ensure a s tatistical notion of fairness related
to [KNRW18b, HJKRR18] which informally states that “on aver age, individuals in two groups
should be treated similarly if on average the individuals in the two groups are similar” — and
this can be achieved with respect to an exponentially or inﬁn itely large set of groups. Similarly,
[GJKR18] assumes the existence of an oracle which can identi fy fairness violations when they are
4
made in an online setting, but cannot quantify the extent of t he violation (with respect to the
unknown metric). It is shown that when the metric is from a spe ciﬁc learnable family, this kind
of feedback is suﬃcient to obtain an optimal regret bound to t he best fair classiﬁer while having
only a bounded number of violations of the fairness metric. [ RY18] consider the case in which the
metric is known, and show that a PAC-inspired approximate va riant of metric fairness generalizes
to new data drawn from the same underlying distribution. Ult imately, however, these approaches
all assume that fairness is perfectly deﬁned with respect to some metric, and that there is some sort
of direct access to it. Can these approaches be generalized t o a more “agnostic” setting, in which
fairness feedback is given by human beings who may not be resp onding in a way that is consistent
with any metric?
3.2 Data Evolution and Dynamics of Fairness
The vast majority of work in computer science on algorithmic fairness has focused on one-shot
classiﬁcation tasks. But real algorithmic systems consist of many diﬀerent components that are
combined together, and operate in complex environments tha t are dynamically changing, some-
times because of the actions of the learning algorithm itsel f. For the ﬁeld to progress, we need to
understand the dynamics of fairness in more complex systems .
Perhaps the simplest aspect of dynamics that remains poorly understood is how and when
components that may individually satisfy notions of fairne ss compose into larger constructs that
still satisfy fairness guarantees. For example, if the bidd ers in an advertising auction individually
are fair with respect to their bidding decisions, when will t he allocation of advertisements be
“fair”, and when will it not? [BKN+17] and [DI18] have made a preliminary foray in this directio n.
These papers embark on a systematic study of fairness under c omposition, and ﬁnd that often the
composition of multiple fair components will not satisfy an y fairness constraint at all. Similarly,
the individual components of a “fair” system may appear to be unfair in isolation. There are
certain special settings, e.g. the “ﬁltering pipeline” sce nario of [BKN+17] — modeling a scenario
in which a job applicant is selected only if she is selected at every stage of the pipeline — in which
(multiplicative approximations of) statistical fairness notions compose in a well behaved way. But
the high level message from these works is that our current no tions of fairness compose poorly.
Experience from diﬀerential privacy [DMNS06, DR14] suggest s that graceful degradation under
composition is key to designing complicated algorithms satisfying desi rable statistical properties,
because it allows algorithm design and analysis to be modular. Thus, it seems important to ﬁnd
satisfying fairness deﬁnitions and richer frameworks that behave well under composition.
In dealing with socio-technical systems, it is also importa nt to understand how algorithms
dynamically eﬀect their environment, and the incentives of h uman actors. For example, if the
bar (for e.g. college admission) is lowered for a group of ind ividuals, this might increase the
average qualiﬁcations for this group over time because of at least two eﬀects: a larger proportion
of children in the next generation grow up in households with college educated parents (and the
opportunities this provides), and the fact that a college ed ucation is achievable can incentivize
eﬀort to prepare academically. These kinds of eﬀects are not co nsidered when considering either
statistical or individual notions of fairness in one-shot l earning settings. The economics literature
on aﬃrmative action has long considered such eﬀects — althoug h not with the speciﬁcs of machine
learning in mind: see e.g. [FV92, CL93, Bec10]. More recentl y, there have been some preliminary
attempts to model these kinds of eﬀects in machine learning se ttings — e.g. by modeling the
environment as a markov decision process [JJK+17], considering the equilibrium eﬀects of imposing
5
statistical deﬁnitions of fairness in a model of a labor mark et [HC18], specifying the functional
relationship between classiﬁcation outcomes and quality [ LDR+18], or by considering the eﬀect of
a classiﬁer on a downstream Bayesian decision maker [KRZ18] . However, the speciﬁc predictions
of most of the models of this sort are brittle to the speciﬁc mo deling assumptions made — they
point to the need to consider long term dynamics, but do not pr ovide robust guidance for how to
navigate them. More work is needed here.
Finally, decisionmakingisoftendistributedbetweenalar genumberofactorswhosharediﬀerent
goals and do not necessarily coordinate. In settings like th is, in which we do not have direct control
over the decision making process, it is important to think ab out how to incentivize rational agents
to behave in a way that we view as fair. [KKM+17] takes a preliminary stab at this task, showing
how to incentivize a particular notion of individual fairne ss in a simple, stylized setting, using small
monetary payments. But how should this work for other notion s of fairness, and in more complex
settings? Can this be done by controlling the ﬂow of informat ion, rather than by making monetary
payments (monetary payments might be distasteful in variou s fairness-relevant settings)? More
work is needed here as well. Finally, [CDPF+17] take a welfare maximization view of fairness in
classiﬁcation, and characterize the cost of imposing addit ional statistical fairness constraints as
well. But this is done in a static environment. How would the c onclusions change under a dynamic
model?
3.3 Modeling and Correcting Bias in the Data
Fairness concerns typically surface precisely in settings where the available training data is already
contaminated by bias. The data itself is often a product of so cial and historical process that op-
erated to the disadvantage of certain groups. When trained i n such data, oﬀ-the-shelf machine
learning techniques may reproduce, reinforce, and potenti ally exacerbate existing biases. Under-
standing how bias arises in the data, and how to correct for it , are fundamental challenges in the
study of fairness in machine learning.
[BCZ+16] demonstrate how machine learning can reproduce biases i n their analysis of the pop-
ular word2vec embedding trained on a corpus of Google News te xts (parallel eﬀects were indepen-
dently discovered by [CBN17]). The authors show that the tra ined embedding exhibit female/male
gender stereotypes, learning that “doctor” is more similar to man than to woman, along with
analogies such as “man is to computer programmer as woman is t o homemaker”. Even if such
learned associations accurately reﬂect patterns in the sou rce text corpus, their use in automated
systems may exacerbate existing biases. For instance, it mi ght result in male applicants being
ranked more highly than equally qualiﬁed female applicants in queries related to jobs that the
embedding identiﬁes as male-associated.
Similar risks arise whenever there is potential for feedbac k loops. These are situations where
the trained machine learning model informs decisions that t hen aﬀect the data collected for future
iterations of the training process. [LI16] demonstrate how feedback loops might arise in predictive
policing if arrest data were used to train the model2. In a nutshell, since police are likely to
make more arrests in more heavily policed areas, using arres t data to predict crime hotspots will
disproportionately concentrate policing eﬀorts on already over-policed communities. Expanding
on this analysis, [EFN+18] ﬁnd that incorporating community-driven data such as cr ime reporting
2Predictive policing models are generally proprietary, and so it is not clear whether arrest data is used to train
the model in any deployed system.
6
helps to attenuate the biasing feedback eﬀects. The authors a lso propose a strategy for accounting
for feedback by adjusting arrest counts for policing intens ity. The success of the mitigation strategy
of course depends on how well the simple theoretical model re ﬂects the true relationships between
crime intensity, policing, and arrests. Problematically, such relationships are often unknown, and
are very diﬃcult to infer from data. This situation is by no me ans speciﬁc to predictive policing.
Correcting for data bias generally seems to require knowled ge of how the measurement process
is biased, or judgments about properties the data would sati sfy in an “unbiased” world. [FSV16]
formalize this as a disconnect between the observed space —features that are observed in the data,
such as SAT scores—and the unobservable construct space —features that form the desired basis
for decision making, such as intelligence. Within this fram ework, data correction eﬀorts attempt
to undo the eﬀects of biasing mechanisms that drive discrepan cies between these spaces. To the
extent that the biasing mechanism cannot be inferred empiri cally, any correction eﬀort must make
explicit its underlying assumptions about this mechanism. What precisely is being assumed about
the construct space? When can the mapping between the constr uct space and the observed space
be learned and inverted? What form of fairness does the corre ction promote, and at what cost?
The costs are often immediately realized, whereas the beneﬁ ts are less tangible. We will directly
observe reductions in prediction accuracy, but any gains hi nge on a belief that the observed world
is not one we should seek to replicate accurately in the ﬁrst p lace. This is an area where tools from
causality may oﬀer a principled approach for drawing valid in ference with respect to unobserved
counterfactually ‘fair’ worlds.
3.4 Fair Representations
Fair representation learning is a data de-biasing process t hat produces transformations ( interme-
diate representations ) of the original data that retain as much of the task-relevan t information as
possible while removing information about sensitive or pro tected attributes. This is one approach
to transforming biased observational data in which group me mbership may be inferred from other
features, to a construct space where protected attributes a re statistically independent of other fea-
tures. First introduced in the work of [ZWS+13], fair representation learning produces a de-biased
data set that may in principle be used by other parties withou t any risk of disparate outcomes.
[FFM+15] and [MOW17] formalize this idea by showing how the dispar ate impact of a decision
rule is bounded in terms of its balanced error rate as a predic tor of the sensitive attribute.
Several recent papers have introduced new approaches for co nstructing fair representations.
[FFM+15] propose rank-preserving procedures for repairing features to reduce or remove pairwise
dependence with the protected attribute. [JL17] build upon this work, introducing a likelihood-
based approach that can additionally handle continuous pro tected attributes, discrete features, and
which promotes joint independence between the transformed features and the protected attributes.
There is also a growing literature on using adversarial lear ning to achieve group fairness in the form
of statistical parity or false positive/false negative rat e balance [ES15, BCZC17, ZLM18, MCPZ18].
Existing theory shows that the fairness promoting beneﬁts o f fair representation learning rely
critically on the extent to which existing associations bet ween thetransformed features andthe pro-
tected characteristics are removed. Adversarial downstre am users may be able to recover protected
attribute information if their models are more powerful tha n those used initially to obfuscate the
data. This presents a challenge both to the generators of fai r representations as well as to auditors
and regulators tasked with certifying that the resulting da ta is fair for use. More work is needed to
understand the implications of fair representation learni ng for promoting fairness in the real world.
7
3.5 Beyond Classiﬁcation
Although the majority of the work on fairness in machine lear ning focuses on batch classiﬁcation,
batch classiﬁcation is only one aspect of how machine learni ng is used. Much of machine learning
— e.g. online learning, bandit learning, and reinforcement learning — focuses on dynamic settings
in which the actions of the algorithm feed back into the data i t observes. These dynamic settings
capture many problems for which fairness is a concern. For ex ample, lending, criminal recidivism
prediction, and sequential drug trials all are so-called banditlearning problems, in which the algo-
rithm cannot observe data corresponding to counterfactual s. We cannot see whether someone not
granted a loan would have paid it back. We cannot see whether an inmate not released on p arole
would have gone on to commit another crime. We cannot see how a patient would have responded
to a diﬀerent drug.
The theory of learning in bandit settings is well understood , and it is characterized by a need
to trade oﬀ exploration withexploitation . Rather than always making a myopically optimal deci-
sion, when counter-factuals cannot be observed, it is neces sary for algorithms to sometimes take
actions that appear to be sub-optimal so as to gather more dat a. But in settings in which deci-
sions correspond to individuals, this means sacriﬁcing the well-being of a particular person for the
potential beneﬁt of future individuals. This can sometimes be unethical, and a source of unfairness
[BBC+16]. Several recent papers explore this issue. For example, [BBK17] and [KMR+18] give
conditions under which linear learners need not explore at a ll in bandit settings, thereby allowing
for best-eﬀort service to each arriving individual, obviati ng the tension between ethical treatment
of individuals and learning. [RSVW18] show that the costs as sociated with exploration can be un-
fairly bourn by a structured sub-population, and that count er-intuitively, those costs can actually
increase when they are included with a majority population, even though more data increases the
rate of learning overall. However, these results are all pre liminary: they are restricted to settings
in which the learner is learning a linear policy, and the data really is governed by a linear model .
While illustrative, more work is needed to understand real- world learning in online settings, and
the ethics of exploration.
There is also some work on fairness in machine learning in oth er settings — for example, rank-
ing [YS17, CSV17], selection [KRW17, KR18], personalizati on [CV17], bandit learning [JKM+18,
LRD+17], human-classiﬁer hybrid decision systems [MPZ17], and reinforcement learning [JJK+17,
DTB17]. But outside of classiﬁcation, the literature is rel atively sparse. This should be rectiﬁed,
because there are interesting and important fairness issue s that arise in other settings — especially
when there are combinatorial constraints on the set of indiv iduals that can be selected for a task,
or when there is a temporal aspect to learning.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supposed by the National Sci ence Foundation under Grant No.
1136993. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recomme ndations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the vie ws of the National Science Foundation.
We are indebted to all of the participants of the CCC visionin g workshop, held March 18-19
2018 in Philadelphia. The workshop discussion shaped every aspect of this document. We are
grateful to Helen Wright and Ann Drobnis, who are instrument al in making the workshop happen.
Finally, we are thankful to Cynthia Dwork, Sampath Kannan, M ichael Kearns, Toni Pitassi, and
Suresh Venkatasubramanian who provided valuable feedback on this report.
8
References
[ABD+18] Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dud´ ık, Joh n Langford, and Hanna Wal-
lach. A reductions approach to fair classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 35th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, ICML , volume 80 of JMLR Workshop and
Conference Proceedings , pages 2569–2577. JMLR.org, 2018.
[BBC+16] Sarah Bird, Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Fernando Diaz , and Hanna Wallach. Ex-
ploring or exploiting? social and ethical implications of a utonomous experimentation
in ai. 2016.
[BBK17] Hamsa Bastani, Mohsen Bayati, and Khashayar Khosra vi. Exploiting the natural
exploration in contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.09011 , 2017.
[BCZ+16] Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh S aligrama, and Adam T
Kalai. Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker ? debiasing word
embeddings. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 4349–4357,
2016.
[BCZC17] Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Zhe Zhao, and Ed H Chi. Data decisions and theoret-
ical implications when adversarially learning fair repres entations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.00075 , 2017.
[Bec10] Gary S Becker. The economics of discrimination . University of Chicago press, 2010.
[BG18] JoyBuolamwiniandTimnitGebru. Gendershades: Inte rsectional accuracydisparities
in commercial gender classiﬁcation. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability and
Transparency , pages 77–91, 2018.
[BHJ+18] Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kea rns, and Aaron Roth. Fair-
ness in criminal justice risk assessments: The state of the a rt.Sociological Methods &
Research , 0(0):0049124118782533, 2018.
[BKN+17] Amanda Bower, Sarah N Kitchen, Laura Niss, Martin J Strau ss, Alexander Vargas,
and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Fair pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00391 ,
2017.
[CBN17] AylinCaliskan, JoannaJBryson, andArvindNarayan an. Semantics derivedautomat-
ically from language corpora contain human-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186,
2017.
[CDPF+17] Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Go el, and Aziz Huq. Algo-
rithmic decision making and the cost of fairness. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Da ta Mining , pages
797–806. ACM, 2017.
[Cho17] Alexandra Chouldechova. Fair prediction with disp arate impact: A study of bias in
recidivism prediction instruments. Big data, 5(2):153–163, 2017.
9
[CJS18] Irene Chen, Fredrik D Johansson, and David Sontag. W hy is my classiﬁer discrimi-
natory? 2018.
[CL93] Stephen Coate and Glenn C Loury. Will aﬃrmative-acti on policies eliminate negative
stereotypes? The American Economic Review , pages 1220–1240, 1993.
[CSV17] L Elisa Celis, Damian Straszak, and Nisheeth K Vishn oi. Ranking with fairness
constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06840 , 2017.
[CV10] Toon Calders and Sicco Verwer. Three naive bayes appr oaches for discrimination-free
classiﬁcation. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 21(2):277–292, 2010.
[CV17] L Elisa Celis and Nisheeth K Vishnoi. Fair personaliz ation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.02260 , 2017.
[DHP+12] Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Rein gold, and Richard Zemel.
Fairness through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical com-
puter science conference , pages 214–226. ACM, 2012.
[DI18] Cynthia Dwork and Christina Ilvento. Fairness under composition. Manuscript , 2018.
[DMNS06] Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and A dam Smith. Calibrating noise
to sensitivity in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography Conference , pages
265–284. Springer, 2006.
[DR14] Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The algorithmic founda tions of diﬀerential privacy.
Foundations and Trends R/circlecopyrtin Theoretical Computer Science , 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.
[DTB17] Shayan Doroudi, Philip S. Thomas, and Emma Brunskil l. Importance sampling for
fair policy selection. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Conference on Uncertainty in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAI . AUAI Press, 2017.
[EFN+18] Danielle Ensign, Sorelle A. Friedler, Scott Neville, Ca rlos Scheidegger, and Suresh
Venkatasubramanian. Runaway feedback loops in predictive policing. In 1st Con-
ference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency in Com puter Science (FAT*) ,
2018.
[ES15] Harrison Edwards and Amos Storkey. Censoring repres entations with an adversary.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05897 , 2015.
[FFM+15] Michael Feldman, Sorelle A Friedler, John Moeller, Carl os Scheidegger, and Suresh
Venkatasubramanian. Certifying and removing disparate im pact. In KDD, 2015.
[FSV16] Sorelle A Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. On the (im)
possibility of fairness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07236 , 2016.
[FV92] Dean P Foster and Rakesh V Vohra. An economic argument for aﬃrmative action.
Rationality and Society , 4(2):176–188, 1992.
[GJKR18] Stephen Gillen, Christopher Jung, Michael Kearns , and Aaron Roth. Online learning
with an unknown fairness metric. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2018.
10
[HC18] Lily Hu and Yiling Chen. A short-term intervention fo r long-term fairness in the
labor market. In Pierre-Antoine Champin, Fabien L. Gandon, Mounia Lalmas, and
Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis, editors, Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference
on World Wide Web, WWW , pages 1389–1398. ACM, 2018.
[HJKRR18] Ursula H´ ebert-Johnson, Michael P Kim, Omer Rein gold, and Guy N Rothblum. Cal-
ibration for the (computationally-identiﬁable) masses. I nProceedings of the 35th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ICML , volume 80 of JMLR Workshop
and Conference Proceedings , pages 2569–2577. JMLR.org, 2018.
[HPS16] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised
learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 3315–3323,
2016.
[JJK+17] Shahin Jabbari, Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie M orgenstern, and Aaron
Roth. Fairness in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
Learning , pages 1617–1626, 2017.
[JKM+18] Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, Set h Neel, and Aaron Roth.
Fair algorithms for inﬁnite and contextual bandits. In AAAI/ACM Conference on
AI, Ethics, and Society , 2018.
[JKMR16] Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie H Morgenste rn, and Aaron Roth. Fairness
in learning: Classic and contextual bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , pages 325–333, 2016.
[JL17] James E Johndrow and Kristian Lum. An algorithm for re moving sensitive in-
formation: application to race-independent recidivism pr ediction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.04957 , 2017.
[KAS11] Toshihiro Kamishima, Shotaro Akaho, and Jun Sakuma . Fairness-aware learning
through regularization approach. In Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), 2011 IEEE
11th International Conference on , pages 643–650. IEEE, 2011.
[KCP+17] Niki Kilbertus, Mateo Rojas Carulla, Giambattista Para scandolo, Moritz Hardt, Do-
minik Janzing, and Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf. Avoiding discrimi nation through causal rea-
soning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 656–666, 2017.
[KGZ18] Michael P Kim, Amirata Ghorbani, and James Zou. Mult iaccuracy: Black-box post-
processing for fairness in classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12317 , 2018.
[KKM+17] Sampath Kannan, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, Mal lesh Pai, Aaron Roth,
Rakesh Vohra, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Fairness incentives for myopic agents. In
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computa tion, pages 369–
386. ACM, 2017.
[KLRS17] Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ri cardo Silva. Counterfactual
fairness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 4069–4079,
2017.
11
[KMR17] Jon M. Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. Inherent trade-oﬀs
in the fair determination of risk scores. In 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
Science Conference, ITCS , 2017.
[KMR+18] Sampath Kannan, Jamie Morgenstern, Aaron Roth, Bo Waggo ner, and Zhiwei Steven
Wu. A smoothed analysis of the greedy algorithm for the linea r contextual bandit
problem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018.
[KNRW18a] Michael Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. An empirical study
of rich subgroupfairness for machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.08166 , 2018.
[KNRW18b] Michael J. Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Zhiw ei Steven Wu. Preventing fairness
gerrymandering: Auditing and learning for subgroup fairne ss. In Jennifer G. Dy and
AndreasKrause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML , volume 80 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings , pages
2569–2577. JMLR.org, 2018.
[KR18] Jon Kleinberg and Manish Raghavan. Selection proble ms in the presence of implicit
bias.arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.03533 , 2018.
[KRR18] Michael P Kim, Omer Reingold, and Guy N Rothblum. Fai rness through
computationally-bounded awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2018.
[KRW17] Michael Kearns, Aaron Roth, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Me ritocratic fairness for cross-
population selection. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1828–
1836, 2017.
[KRZ18] Sampath Kannan, Aaron Roth, and Juba Ziani. Downstr eam eﬀects of aﬃrmative
action.arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09004 , 2018.
[LDR+18] Lydia T Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. Delayed
impact of fair machine learning. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML , 2018.
[LI16] Kristian Lum and William Isaac. To predict and serve? Signiﬁcance , 13(5):14–19,
2016.
[LRD+17] Yang Liu, Goran Radanovic, Christos Dimitrakakis, Debm alya Mandal, and David C
Parkes. Calibrated fairness in bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01875 , 2017.
[MCPZ18] David Madras, Elliot Creager, Toniann Pitassi, an d Richard Zemel. Learning adver-
sarially fair and transferable representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06309 , 2018.
[MOW17] Daniel McNamara, Cheng Soon Ong, and Robert C Willia mson. Provably fair repre-
sentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.04394 , 2017.
[MPZ17] DavidMadras, ToniannPitassi, andRichardS.Zemel . Predictresponsibly: Increasing
fairness by learning to defer. CoRR, abs/1711.06664, 2017.
12
[NS18] Razieh Nabi and Ilya Shpitser. Fair inference on outc omes. In Proceedings of the...
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, volume 2018, page 1931. NIH Public Access, 2018.
[PRT08] DinoPedreshi, SalvatoreRuggieri, andFrancoTuri ni. Discrimination-aware datamin-
ing. InProceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference o n Knowledge
discovery and data mining , pages 560–568. ACM, 2008.
[Rot14] Jonathan Rothwell. How the war on drugs damages blac k social mobility. The Brook-
ings Institution, published Sept , 30, 2014.
[RSVW18] ManishRaghavan, AlexandrsSlivkins, JenniferWo rtman Vaughan, andZhiweiSteven
Wu. The unfair externalities of exploration. In Conference on Learning Theory , 2018.
[RY18] Guy N Rothblum and Gal Yona. Probably approximately m etric-fair learning. In
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine L earning, ICML , vol-
ume80 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings , pages 2569–2577. JMLR.org,
2018.
[Swe13] Latanya Sweeney. Discrimination in online ad deliv ery.Queue, 11(3):10, 2013.
[WGOS17] Blake Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Mesrob I Ohann essian, and Nathan Srebro.
Learning non-discriminatory predictors. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages
1920–1953, 2017.
[YS17] Ke Yang and Julia Stoyanovich. Measuring fairness in ranked outputs. In Proceedings
of the 29th International Conference on Scientiﬁc and Statist ical Database Manage-
ment, page 22. ACM, 2017.
[ZLM18] Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchel l. Mitigating unwanted biases
with adversarial learning. 2018.
[ZVGG17] Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez -Rodriguez, and Krishna P.
Gummadi. Fairness beyond disparate treatment & disparate i mpact: Learning clas-
siﬁcation without disparate mistreatment. In Proceedings of the 26th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW , pages 1171–1180. ACM, 2017.
[ZWS+13] Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynth ia Dwork. Learning fair
representations. In ICML, 2013.
13