Title: Chat as Expected: Learning to Manipulate Black-box Neural Dialogue Models

Chat as Expected: Learning to Manipulate
Black-box Neural Dialogue Models
Haochen Liu
Michigan State University
liuhaoc1@msu.edu
Tyler Derr
Michigan State University
derrtyle@msu.eduZhiwei Wang
Michigan State University
wangzh65@msu.edu
Jiliang Tang
Michigan State University
tangjili@msu.edu
Abstract
Recently, neural network based dialogue sys-
tems have become ubiquitous in our increas-
ingly digitalized society. However, due to their
inherent opaqueness, some recently raised con-
cerns about using neural models are starting to
be taken seriously. In fact, intentional or un-
intentional behaviors could lead to a dialogue
system to generate inappropriate responses.
Thus, in this paper, we investigate whether
we can learn to craft input sentences that re-
sult in a black-box neural dialogue model be-
ing manipulated into having its outputs con-
tain target words or match target sentences.
We propose a reinforcement learning based
model that can generate such desired inputs
automatically. Extensive experiments on a
popular well-trained state-of-the-art neural di-
alogue model show that our method can suc-
cessfully seek out desired inputs that lead to
the target outputs in a considerable portion of
cases. Consequently, our work reveals the po-
tential of neural dialogue models to be manip-
ulated, which inspires and opens the door to-
wards developing strategies to defend them.
1 Introduction
In recent years, we have seen an astonishingly
fast adoption of dialogue systems being utilized
across many domains and we are interacting with
them more and more in our everyday lives. From
early such as chatbots ELIZA (Weizenbaum, 1966)
and ALICE (Wallace, 2001) to later ones like Siri
and XiaoIce (Shum et al., 2018), the techniques
have evolved from hand-crafted rule-based meth-
ods (Weizenbaum, 1966; Goddeau et al., 1996),
retrieval-based methods (Lu and Li, 2013; Hu et al.,
2014) to learning-based methods (Shang et al.,
2015; Vinyals and Le, 2015; Serban et al., 2016).
Recently, because of the advent of a series of deep
learning models and the appearance of large-scale
real dialogue corpora, end-to-end neural generativedialogue models emerge (Chen et al., 2017). Due
to the simple implementation and the strong gen-
eralization ability of neural dialogue models, they
are one of the most popular techniques to build
practical chatbot services (Zhou et al., 2018).
However, with the wide application of neural
dialogue models, the ethical challenges they bring
are attracting more and more attention (Hender-
son et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019a; Dinan et al.,
2019). More recently it has been demonstrated that
neural networks suffer from some problems includ-
ing vulnerability due to their black-box nature and
our lack of truly understanding their inner process-
ing (Szegedy et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2019). Thus,
as we are integrating these systems into more crit-
ical and sensitive domains, it raises some serious
concerns (Yuan et al., 2019), such as whether or
not they can be manipulated to provide certain de-
sired output (He and Glass, 2018; Liu et al., 2019b).
More speciﬁcally, if such systems can be manipu-
lated it could potentially cause a drastic shift to the
current paradigm of how we interact with these sys-
tems. For example, Tay, an AI chatbot developed
by Microsoft, was shut down shortly after release
due to its racism, sexist and obscene speech (Wolf
et al., 2017). Online troublemakers found its vul-
nerability and tried a variety of inputs to induce
it to output inappropriate (malicious or sensitive)
responses (Price, 2016). To that end, in this work,
we set out to study this fundamental question of
whether we can learn to manipulate state-of-the-
art black-box dialogue models to produce target
outputs by crafting inputs automatically. It goes
without saying that if indeed we can manipulate
these systems and if we are currently integrating
them into our daily lives at such a rapid pace, then
this opens the door to a plethora of potential harm-
ful attacks that could be performed and potentially
result in an almost unimaginable set of possible
negative outcomes.arXiv:2005.13170v1  [cs.CL]  27 May 2020
Nevertheless, even having now realized how crit-
ical this question is to being answered, the path to
discovering an answer has numerous challenges.
First, unlike many existing studies in other do-
mains such as images (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Chen, 2018), here the input search space is dis-
crete and thus the traditional gradient-based opti-
mization methodologies cannot be harnessed effec-
tively (Zhang et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2017). Fur-
thermore, while seeking to discover if the current
dialogue systems can be manipulated, we should
not make the unreasonable assumption of having
access to the full details/knowledge (i.e., model
structure and parameters) of the system. Currently,
most developed methodologies have focused on
the continuous input space domain and further-
more assumed access to the model. Thus, since
our problem is deﬁned with a discrete input do-
main and our concern of whether these models can
be manipulated is more realistic in the setting of a
black-box dialogue model, then existing methods
can not be applied and we require the development
of novel frameworks to answer this indispensable
fundamental question.
To address the above-mentioned challenges, in
this paper, we regard the learning to craft input
sentences as a sequential decision-making process.
To this end, we propose the Target Dialogue Gener-
ation Policy Network (TDGPN), which serves as
a reinforcement learning (RL) agent to iteratively
generate tokens guided towards speciﬁc objectives.
The proposed policy networks are optimized by the
REINFORCE-style estimators (Williams, 1992),
eliminating the needs for standard gradient back-
propagation which is largely impaired by the dis-
crete nature of the sentence generation process and
the assumption of no access to the dialogue model
parameters. Our main contributions are summa-
rized as follows:
We identify the importance of exploring the
potential of a black-box neural dialogue model
to be manipulated towards a target output.
We devise an RL-based framework TDGPN to
effectively overcome the challenges associated
with crafting inputs that enable black-box neural
dialogue models to generate target responses.
Experiments on a well-trained black-box neu-
ral dialogue model verify the effectiveness of
TDGPN that lead to target responses with a con-
siderable success rate.
Dialogue ModelReward FunctionRNNSSDR(S)
Policy NetworkEnvironmentSTFigure 1: Diagram showing the overall reinforcement
learning process for TDGPN.
2 The Proposed Framework
2.1 Problem Deﬁnition
Before detailing the proposed framework, we ﬁrst
recap the problem of learning to manipulate neu-
ral dialogue models. Suppose we have a neural
dialogue model D, which is regarded as a black
box and able to output a response sentence SD
for a given input sentence. We seek for learning
to craft an input sentence Sthat will lead Dto
output a response SD:=D(S)that satisﬁes spe-
ciﬁc requirements. We consider the following two
manipulation tasks:
Target word task. Given a target word wT,
we aim to learn to craft an input sentence Sthat
will lead the dialogue model to output a response
sentenceSDthat contains the target word, i.e.,
wT2SD.
Target response task. Given a target response
ST, we aim to learn to craft an input sentence Sthat
will lead the dialogue model to output a response
sentenceSDthat is semantically approximate to
the target response, i.e., SDST.
We build a generative model Gparameterized
byto learn to craft such input sentences. Then
the above problems are both essentially an opti-
mization problem where we want to ﬁnd optimum
parameters of Gso that a) the probability of wT
being generated in SD, or b) the similarity between
D(S)andSTcan be maximized. However, it is
very challenging to solve this problem with the
standard gradient-based back-propagation methods
because of two reasons. First, Sconsists of dis-
crete tokens instead of continuous values. Thus, it
is difﬁcult to let the gradient back through G. Sec-
ond, we do not have access to the dialogue model
Policy  NetworkEnvironment
stst+1MCatat 1R(S1:t,at)R(S1:t 1,at)R(S1:t+1,at)
Step t-1Step tStep t+1Figure 2: Diagram showing how to obtain the inter-
mediate reward R(S1:t;at)at stepstusing the Monte
Carlo (MC) method.
parameters, which makes it impossible to compute
the gradient w.r.t D. Therefore, in this section, we
formulate the problem as an RL problem and repre-
sent the generative model Gby a policy network
, which regards the token generation process as a
decision making process with the purpose to obtain
a maximum reward.
The overall learning diagram is shown in Fig-
ure 1. There are two key components, i.e., pol-
icy network and environment which consists of a
dialogue model and a reward function. The pol-
icy network will interact with the environment by
generating input sentences S. Then, based on S
the environment will provide rewards to the policy
network, which will in turn update its parameters
towards obtaining maximum rewards. Next, we
detail the interaction process.
2.2 Sentence Generation Process
In this subsection, we describe the sentence gener-
ation process which can be regarded as a decision
making process. On a high level, at each step, a
policy network observes the state, outputs a token
(i.e., makes an action) and receives a reward based
on the dialogue model (i.e. environment). The
generation process will be terminated when the pol-
icy network outputs an end-of-sentence token, after
which the policy network will be updated according
to the rewards. Next, we describe the state, actions,
policy network, reward, and objective function.
2.2.1 State and Action
In our framework, we denote the state at step t
of the sentence generation process as stand let
st=S1:t, whereS1:tis a sequence of already
generated tokens at step t. More speciﬁcally,S1:t=fx1;x2;;xtg, wherexi2 V andV
is the vocabulary containing all the possible tokens.
In addition, we assume that the state is fully ob-
served. The start state is s0=fx0gwhich consists
of a special token x0that indicates the start of a
sentence. Thus, the state transition is determinis-
tic such that P(st=S1:tjst 1;at=xt) = 1 and
P(st=s0jst 1;at=xt) = 0;8s06=S1:t, where
atis the action (i.e., token) at step t.
2.2.2 Policy Network
In this work, we represent the policy by a Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Network whose in-
put is the state and output is selection probabilities
pover all the possible actions, which are the tokens
inVincluding a special token indicating the end
of the sentence and leading to the terminate state.
The weights of the LSTM are the policy parameters
denoted by. More speciﬁcally, given the current
statest=S1:t=fx1;x2;;xtg, wherexi2V
is the token generated at step t, the LSTM will out-
put a sequence of hidden states fh1;h2;;htg
by the following recursive functions:
ht= LSTM(xt;ht 1) (1)
With the hidden states fh1;h2;;htg, the rep-
resentation of current state mtcan be obtained
through:
mt=g(h1;h2;;ht) (2)
whereg()is a function that maps the hidden states
to ad-dimensional hidden space and there are many
choices forg()such as using a popular attention
mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014). In this work,
we letg(h1;h2;;ht) =ht, which is commonly
used for many RNN-based models and leave the
investigation into other choices as a future work.
With the representation mt, the probability distri-
bution over all the possible actions (ajmt)is
calculated as:
(ajmt) = softmax( Wvmt+bv) (3)
whereWv2RjVjdandbvare the parameters to
be learned during the training process when having
a vocabulary size of jVj.
2.2.3 Reward
Remember that STis the target sentence and let
SD=D(S)be the response produced by the dia-
logue model Dwhen given Sas input. We deﬁne
two different reward functions for the two manipu-
lation tasks.
Target word task. In this task we want to
learn an input sentence which leads to the dialogue
model to output a response containing the target
wordwT. Thus, we wish that the probability of
the target word predicted by the output layer of the
dialogue model to be the largest at some timestamp
t2[T]. We deﬁne the reward of the input sentence
Sas follows:
R(S) = max
t2[T](pt(wT) max
w6=wTfpt(wT)g)(4)
wherept(wT)is the predicted probability of target
wordwTat timestamp tandmaxw6=wTfpt(wT)g
indicates the largest probability among all the
words other than wTat this timestamp.
Target response task. In this task, we wish
the dialogue model can output a response that is
semantically similar to the target response but not
necessarily exactly matching it. We use the average
word embedding similarity (Wieting et al., 2016)
betweenSTandSD=D(S)as the reward for
the input sentence generated by the policy network.
We deﬁne the reward as follows:
R(S) = Sim(ST;D(S)) (5)
whereSis the sentence generated by the policy
network and Sim is the similarity measurement.
Eq (4) and (5) only provide the ﬁnal rewards to
the whole generated sentence S. In addition, we
design the reward R(S1:t;at)at the intermediate
statestto be the action-value function. Formally,
R(S1:t;at) =Q(S1:t;at) (6)
whereQ(a;St)is the Q-value, which estimates
the expected ﬁnal reward for the given action and
state pair (Watkins and Dayan, 1992). We further
adopt the Monte Carlo methods (Yu et al., 2017;
Sutton et al., 2000) to estimate Q(S1:t;at). The
way to calculate the intermediate reward is shown
in Figure 2. Speciﬁcally, given S1:tandat, we use
current policy to continuously simulate T t
tokens until the terminate state is reached, where
Tis the length of the complete simulated sentence.
The simulation process will be repeated Nrtimes.
We deﬁne this formally as follows:
n
Sj
1:ToNr
j=1= Simulation(S1:t;at)(7)whereSj
1:Tis a simulated sentence and Sj
1:t=S1:t
for allj2f1;:::;Nrg. Now, givenn
Sj
1:ToNr
j=1,
the estimation of R(S1:t;at)is calculated as:
R(S1:t;at) =1
NrNrX
j=1Sim(ST;D(Sj
1:T))(8)
wheret < T indicates the intermediate step. We
note that when t=Twe can directly use Eq (4)
and (5) rather than Eq. (8).
Objective Function. With the previously deﬁned
reward function, the objective function that the
agent aims to maximize can be formulated as fol-
lows:
J() =ES(S)R(S) (9)
The accurate value of J()in Eq. (9) is very dif-
ﬁcult to obtain in practice. Next, we describe our
optimization procedure for TDGPN.
2.3 Monte-Carlo Policy Gradient:
REINFORCE
To optimize the objective in Eq. (9), we adopt the
widely used REINFORCE algorithm (Williams,
1992), where Monte-Carlo sampling is applied to
estimaterJ(). Speciﬁcally,
rJ() =X
SR(S)r(S) (10)
=ES(S)[R(S)(S)rlog(S)]
1
NNX
i=1TX
t=1rlog(ai
tjSi
1:t)R(S)
We replace the reward for the whole sentence in
Eq. (10) with the intermediate reward to acceler-
ate the training speed and effectiveness (Liu et al.,
2017). Thus, the estimated gradient of TDGPN’s
objective is rewritten as:
rJ()1
NNX
i=1TX
t=1rlog(ai
tjSi
1:t)R(Si
1:t;ai
t)
(11)
With the obtained gradient rJ(), the parameters
of the policy network can be updated as follows:
=+rJ() (12)
whereis the learning rate.
2.4 Alternate Learning
At the beginning of the RL training, since the pol-
icy network has little knowledge about the environ-
ment, it just randomly generates input sentences
which hardly lead the dialogue model to output
an expected response. As a result, few action-
state pairs (S1:t;at)can receive positive rewards
R(S1:t;at). This problem impacts training efﬁ-
ciency seriously. To solve this issue, we propose
to use samples that we know are closer to the de-
sired input sentences so far as extra guidance to
train the policy network. We call them “pacesetter”
samples. Recall that in each iteration, we sample
Ninput sentences for RL training. The lengths of
these sample sentences are ftigN
i=1. To estimate
the reward for each state-action pair, we simulate
Nrcomplete input sentences. So we can get totallyPN
i=1Nrticomplete input sentences and their cor-
responding rewards. We collect the input sentences
with the largest top- Krewards as the pacesetter
samples. Then, we use the pacesetter samples as
the training examples to optimize the policy net-
work via supervised learning (SL) for once. We
update the parameters in the policy network by opti-
mizing the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
objective of the pacesetter samples. In this way,
we perform RL and SL alternately to speed up the
convergence of the policy network.
The detailed optimization process is shown in
Algorithm 1. Here we brieﬂy introduce the algo-
rithm. In line 1, we initialize the policy network
using a pre-trained language model 0. From
line 3 to line 10, we use our proposed algorithm
to update the parameters of , until it could gen-
erate sentences that will make the dialogue model
output the target sentence STor the number of
iterations exceed M. Speciﬁcally, in line 5, we
randomly sample Nsentences from , then for
each sampled sentence at each step t, we sample
Nrsentences to estimate the intermediate reward
(i.e., action-value) R(Si
1:t;ai
t)and compute the gra-
dient according to Eq. (11), which is used to update
by Eq. (12). In lines 14 and 15, we collect the
pacesetter samples and update the policy network
on them via supervised learning. If the policy net-
work cannot ﬁnd a desired sentence SwithinM
iterations, the algorithm will output a “Failure”.Algorithm 1: Optimization for TDGPN
Input: Dialogue model D, a pre-trained language model
0, target word wTor target response ST,
hyper-parameters including N,M,Nr,Kand
Output: an desired sentence Sor “Failure”
1Initialize: 0;
2iter 1;
3repeat
4 iter iter + 1;
5 GenerateNsentences
Si	N
i=1from
6 fori 1toNdo
7 fort 1toTdo
8 Sample
Sij
t	Nr
j=1based onSi
1:tand
9 ComputeR(Si
1:t;ai
t)according to Eq. (8)
10rJ() 
rJ()+rlog(ai
t;Si
1:t)R(Si
1:t;ai
t)
11 end
12 end
13 +
NrJ();
14 Collect the top- Kpacesetter samples fpigK
i=1from
fSij
tji2[1;N];j2[1;Nr];t2[1;ti]g;
15 UpdateonfpigK
i=1;
16until iter>=Mor ﬁnd a sentence Ssuch thatD(S)
satisﬁes the requirement.
3 Experiment
3.1 Experimental Settings
In this subsection, we give a description of the
experimental settings including the state-of-the-art
dialogue model we are trying to manipulate, the
implementation details of the policy network, and
the training procedure of the proposed framework.
The Dialogue Model. The experiments are
conducted on a classic Seq2Seq (Sutskever et al.,
2014) neural dialogue model. In this Seq2Seq
model, both the encoder and the decoder are im-
plemented by 3-layer LSTM networks with hidden
states of size 1024. The vocabulary size is 30,000.
Pre-trained Glove word vectors (Pennington et al.,
2014) are used as the word embeddings whose di-
mension is 300.
Dataset. ATwitter Conversation Corpus is used
to pre-train the policy network, construct target
response list, etc. This corpus is different from
the one for training the black-box dialogue model.
The corpus consists of tweets and replies extracted
from Twitter. It contains 1,394,939 single-turn En-
glish dialogues in open domains. The dataset is
randomly split into training set, validation set, and
test set, which consist of 976,457, 139,498 and
278,984 dialogues, respectively.
Implementation Details. In this work, we use
a 2-layer LSTM with the hidden size being 1,024
as the policy network, which is implemented with
Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019). Before the manipula-
tion experiments, we pre-trained the LSTM on the
training set of the Twitter dialogue corpus where
every single post or reply is treated as a sentence,
resulting in around 1.9 million sentences in total.
Speciﬁcally, in the pre-training process, the model
is optimized by the standard stochastic gradient
descent algorithm with the learning rate of 1.0. In
addition, to prevent overﬁtting issues, we apply the
dropout with the rate of 0.1 and gradient clipping
with clip-value being 0.25. Moreover, the word em-
beddings are randomly initialized and ﬁne-tuned
during the pre-training process.
As for the details in relation to Algorithm 1, we
set the sample size Nto be 5. The number of sim-
ulations per generated sentence (i.e., Nr) is set to
5. The maximum sequence length is 5 and 10 for
target word task and target response task, respec-
tively. In addition, the policy network parameters
are optimized by Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014)
with the learning rate of 0:001and0:05for the
above two tasks, respectively. During RL training,
once we ﬁnd a sample that satisﬁes a requirement,
the training process will stop and we consider it
to be successful. On the other hand, if the model
cannot ﬁnd a desired sample within M= 50 it-
erations, then we consider it as a failure. For the
target word task, the requirement is that the out-
put response contains the target word; while for the
target response task, the requirement is that the sim-
ilarity between the output response and the target
response exceeds a threshold.
We note in the target word task, we don’t directly
adopt the reward deﬁned in Eq. (4). Instead, for
an input sentence S, we use max(R(S) b;0),
wherebis a baseline deﬁned as the average reward
value of a batch of input sentences. By the function
max(;0), we replace all the negative rewards with
0and only keep the positive rewards. Additionally,
for the target response task, before RL training,
we build a reference corpus by feeding 200k utter-
ances (from the training set of the Twitter dialogue
corpus) into the dialogue model and obtain 200k
input-response pairs. Then, in order to improve the
efﬁciency of training, at the beginning of each train-
ing session, we search 5 inputs whose responses
are most similar to the target response as the ﬁrst
batch to train the model.Table 1: Results of the target word task.
Success Rate Average Iterations
Common 65% 12.64
Malicious 30% 38.73
Table 2: Case Study of the target word task on Mali-
cious target word list. Input indicates the input crafted
by TDGPN and output is the corresponding response
produced by the dialogue model. Num.Iter represents
the number of iterations.
Target word: shit
Input: then start to eat
Output: i ’ m not going to eat that shit
Num.Iter: 5
Target word: ass
Input: fat , i’m too classy
Output: i ’ m not a fat ass
Num.Iter: 7
Target word: idiot
Input: when he is boring that
Output: he ’ s a fucking idiot
Num.Iter: 24
3.2 Experimental Results
In this subsection, we present the results of our
experiments.
Target word task. In the experiments, we con-
struct two lists of words as our target words. We
randomly sample 200 words from the most frequent
800 words of the Twitter conversation corpus. They
form the Common target word list. Moreover, we
manually construct a Malicious target word list
containing 50 malicious or dirty words that a dia-
logue agent has to avoid to say1.
Table 1 shows the success rate of our proposed
TDGPN as well as the average number of iterations
the algorithm performs to achieve a successful ma-
nipulation. We can see that our algorithm can ma-
nipulate the dialogue model successfully for a con-
siderable number of target words. Moreover, we
observe that the common words achieve higher suc-
cess rate and need fewer iterations, which means
that it’s easier to manipulate the common words
than the malicious words. We show three cases of
successful manipulation on malicious target words
in Table 2.
Target response task. For the target response
task, we ﬁrst construct two lists of target responses.
So called Generated andReal target response lists
are used. To construct the generated target response
list, we ﬁrst feed 200k human utterances from the
1When doing experiments on the malicious target words,
we setN= 10 andM= 100 .
test set of the Twitter dialogue corpus into the dia-
logue model to get 200k generated responses and
then randomly sample 200 responses as the targets
in length 1-3, 4-6 and 7-10, respectively. The real
target response list is obtained by randomly sam-
pling sentences from the rest part of the test set
of the Twitter dialogue corpus. And we ﬁlter out
some sentences which also occur in the generated
target response list, to ensure that there is no over-
lap between two lists. The number of real target
responses in each length group is also 200.
In Figure 3, we show the success rates of
TDGPN for manipulating the Twitter dialogue
model on two lists of target responses. The ﬁg-
ure shows how success rates vary with different
thresholds. For example, in Figure (a), we can suc-
cessfully ﬁnd desired inputs that lead to responses
whose similarities with the target ones are above
the threshold 0:8, for 34:5%generated target re-
sponses with length 1-3.
First of all, from the ﬁgures we can see that for
both the generated and the real target lists, TDGPN
can achieve a success rate 85% 100% with a
threshold of 0:5. Especially for more than around
80% generated targets with length greater than or
equal to 4, TDGPN is able to ﬁnd desired inputs
that lead to a similarity score above 0:8. One key
observation is that the model performs signiﬁcantly
better on the generated target list than on the real
target response list. Actually, the neural dialogue
models suffer from a safe response problem (Li
et al., 2015). Such models tend to offer generic re-
sponses to diverse inputs, which makes it hard for
the model to provide a target speciﬁc response (of-
ten seen in real human conversations). In addition,
we observe that the success rate of manipulation
is closely related to the length of target responses.
Except for a few cases, for longer target responses,
it’s easier for TDGPN to manipulate the dialogue
model to say something similar to them.
The Quality of Crafted Inputs. For each real tar-
get response, TDGPN tries to ﬁnd an input whose
corresponding output response is most similar to
the target one. We also feed the real inputs corre-
sponding to the target responses in the corpus into
the dialogue model. We aim to check how similar
the output responses to the target ones in manipu-
lated and original settings. To further demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed framework in ma-
nipulating the dialogue model, we calculate these
similarity scores for each real target response andTable 3: Average similarity scores between the output
response and the target response in Real list.
Length 1-3 4-6 7-10
Real Input 0.439 0.518 0.566
TDGPN 0.69 0.726 0.748
report the average value in Table 3. From the table,
we make the following observations. First, even
inputting the real inputs, the similarity scores be-
tween the output responses and the target responses
are not high. Second, with the generated inputs
from the proposed framework, the similarity scores
are signiﬁcantly improved. Speciﬁcally, the word
embedding similarity increases by 57:2%,40:2%
and32:2%for the target responses with length 1-3,
4-6 and 7-10, respectively.
Case Study. Table 4 shows ﬁve examples in the
manipulating experiments. The ﬁrst three target
responses are from the generated target response
list while the other two are from the real response
list. Given those target responses, desired inputs
are successfully crafted. Each of them leads to
an output of the dialogue model similar to the tar-
get one, evaluating by the corresponding similarity
measurement. Besides, unlike some related works
(He and Glass, 2018; Cheng et al., 2018) where
crafted text inputs are ungrammatical and meaning-
less, the inputs generated by our model are smooth
and natural utterances, which is guaranteed by the
language model.
4 Related Work
Model attack in NLP has been a fast-moving ﬁeld
especially across many neural based methodolo-
gies (Chakraborty et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019),
since our understanding of their inner workings is
quite limited. Chen et al. (Chen, 2018) investigate
the ability for small perturbations that could result
in the image captioning to contain a randomly se-
lected keyword/caption. Although this is similar to
our problem in that they are generating target text,
the key difference is that they are working with
continuous inputs (i.e., images). Similarly, some
work has focused on text classiﬁcation (Kuleshov
et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2018), but in the white-box
setting as compared to our framework is proposed
in the black-box setting.
Our work is primarily related to other works
focused on building a better understanding of
Table 4: Case Study. The ﬁrst column shows the inputs from TDGPN. The middle column shows the target
responses and the outputs by the dialogue model. The third column shows the similarity score.
Inputs Responses Similarity
the band perry is goin to be at the
moviesTarget : i ’ m going to be there tomorrow ! 0.958
Output : i ’ m going to be there
i followed you so you better follow
me backTarget : i ’ m not following you . 0.952
Output : i ’ m sorry i ’ m not following you
so i have a friend in the seaTarget : i ’ m in the same boat lol 0.958
Output : i ’ m in the same boat .
what’s poppin peeps ?Target : nothing much just us chatting shit really 0.826
Output : nothing much , just chillin
honestly i miss my brotherTarget : me = miss you ( : lol . 0.876
Output : i miss you too
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.90.00.51.0 91.5%
74.5%
51.5%
34.5%
13.5%(a) Generated 1-3
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.90.00.51.0
85.5%
74.5%
54.5%
17.0%
5.5%(b) Real 1-3
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.90.00.51.0Success Rate97.5%95.0%
88.5%
73.5%
23.5%(c) Generated 4-6
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.90.00.51.098.5%
89.5%
67.0%
24.5%
2.5%(d) Real 4-6
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Threshold0.00.51.099.5% 99.0% 98.0%93.5%
35.0%(e) Generated 7-10
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Threshold0.00.51.099.5%
93.5%
75.5%
28.5%
0.0%(f) Real 7-10
Figure 3: Results for the target response task.
sequence-to-sequence based dialog system models,
such as their over-sensitivity and over-stability (Niu
and Bansal, 2018), robustness (Cheng et al.,
2018) and likeliness of generating egregious re-
sponses (He and Glass, 2018). In (Cheng
et al., 2018) the problem of attacking sequence-
to-sequence models is presented to evaluate the
robustness of this class of deep neural networks.
Unlike our work, they focus on the development of
a white-box framework that is built around having
the gradient. However, in practice, the assump-
tion of accessing the full knowledge of the neuralnetwork is far less practical (Zhang et al., 2019).
Then Niu et al. (Niu and Bansal, 2018) focus on
using adversarial training to investigate both over-
sensitivity and over-stability of dialogue models,
where the small changes to the input should or
should not change the output of the dialogue sys-
tem, respectively. Besides, He et al. (He and Glass,
2018) focus on learning an input to generate a spe-
ciﬁc offensive/malicious output of a pre-trained
dialogue system. However, our proposed frame-
work is based on the black-box setting (unlike their
model, which is under the white-box assumption)
which raises signiﬁcantly higher levels of com-
plexity to develop an optimization process. The
work (Liu et al., 2019b) investigates the target re-
sponse task on the black-box setting. The authors
train a reusable reverse dialogue generator by rein-
forcement learning and use it to discover the inputs
leading to target outputs through multiple trials.
5 Conclusion
Currently, the state-of-the-art dialogue systems are
harnessing the power of deep neural models, and al-
though they are proving to become more and more
human-like, recent concerns have been raised for
neural models across all domains as to whether
they can be manipulated (with most focusing on
malicious attacks). Thus, in this work, we investi-
gate whether current neural dialogue models can
be manipulated and develop a reinforcement learn-
ing based sentence generation framework that can
learn to craft the input sentences causing dialogue
models to output target words and responses. We
conduct extensive experiments on a state-of-the-art
dialogue neural model and the results show that
dialogue systems can indeed be manipulated. In ad-
dition, our proposed method is not only able to ma-
nipulate neural dialogue model, but it’s also likely
to be applied on black-box dialogue systems based
on other methods (e.g. rule-based, retrieval-based,
etc.), or even models for other natural language
generation tasks (e.g. text summarization, machine
translation, etc.). We will leave the investigations
on these areas as future works.
References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473 .
Anirban Chakraborty, Manaar Alam, Vishal Dey, Anu-
pam Chattopadhyay, and Debdeep Mukhopadhyay.
2018. Adversarial attacks and defences: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00069 .
Hongge Chen. 2018. Attacking visual language
grounding with adversarial examples: A case study
on neural image captioning. In ACL.
Hongshen Chen, Xiaorui Liu, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang
Tang. 2017. A survey on dialogue systems: Recent
advances and new frontiers. ACM SIGKDD Explo-
rations Newsletter , 19(2):25–35.
Minhao Cheng, Jinfeng Yi, Huan Zhang, Pin-Yu Chen,
and Cho-Jui Hsieh. 2018. Seq2sick: Evaluat-
ing the robustness of sequence-to-sequence mod-
els with adversarial examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.01128 .
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack Ur-
banek, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2019.
Queens are powerful too: Mitigating gender
bias in dialogue generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.03842 .
David Goddeau, Helen Meng, Joseph Polifroni,
Stephanie Seneff, and Senis Busayapongchai. 1996.
A form-based dialogue manager for spoken lan-
guage applications. In Proceeding of Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Spoken Language Processing.
ICSLP’96 , volume 2, pages 701–704. IEEE.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian
Szegedy. 2014. Explaining and harnessing adversar-
ial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 .
Tianxing He and James Glass. 2018. Detecting
egregious responses in neural sequence-to-sequence
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.04113 .
Peter Henderson, Koustuv Sinha, Nicolas Angelard-
Gontier, Nan Rosemary Ke, Genevieve Fried, Ryan
Lowe, and Joelle Pineau. 2017. Ethical challenges
in data-driven dialogue systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.09050 .Baotian Hu, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Qingcai
Chen. 2014. Convolutional neural network architec-
tures for matching natural language sentences. In
Advances in neural information processing systems ,
pages 2042–2050.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 .
V olodymyr Kuleshov, Shantanu Thakoor, Tingfung
Lau, and Stefano Ermon. 2018. Adversarial ex-
amples for natural language classiﬁcation problems.
Open Review submission OpenReview:r1QZ3zbAZ .
Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao,
and Bill Dolan. 2015. A diversity-promoting objec-
tive function for neural conversation models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1510.03055 .
Bin Liang, Hongcheng Li, Miaoqiang Su, Pan Bian,
Xirong Li, and Wenchang Shi. 2018. Deep text
classiﬁcation can be fooled. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-18 , pages 4208–4215.
International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Organization.
Haochen Liu, Jamell Dacon, Wenqi Fan, Hui Liu, Zitao
Liu, and Jiliang Tang. 2019a. Does gender matter?
towards fairness in dialogue systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.10486 .
Haochen Liu, Tyler Derr, Zitao Liu, and Jiliang Tang.
2019b. Say what i want: Towards the dark
side of neural dialogue models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.06044 .
Siqi Liu, Zhenhai Zhu, Ning Ye, Sergio Guadarrama,
and Kevin Murphy. 2017. Improved image caption-
ing via policy gradient optimization of spider. In
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision , pages 873–881.
Zhengdong Lu and Hang Li. 2013. A deep architec-
ture for matching short texts. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 1367–1375.
Tong Niu and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Adversarial over-
sensitivity and over-stability strategies for dialogue
models. In The SIGNLL Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning (CoNLL) .
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam
Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, et al. 2019. Pytorch: An imperative style,
high-performance deep learning library. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pages 8024–8035.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language process-
ing (EMNLP) , pages 1532–1543.
Rob Price. 2016. Microsoft is deleting its ai chatbots
incredibly racist tweets. Business Insider .
Iulian Vlad Serban, Alessandro Sordoni, Yoshua Ben-
gio, Aaron C Courville, and Joelle Pineau. 2016.
Building end-to-end dialogue systems using gener-
ative hierarchical neural network models. In AAAI ,
volume 16, pages 3776–3784.
Lifeng Shang, Zhengdong Lu, and Hang Li. 2015. Neu-
ral responding machine for short-text conversation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02364 .
Heung-Yeung Shum, Xiao-dong He, and Di Li. 2018.
From eliza to xiaoice: challenges and opportunities
with social chatbots. Frontiers of Information Tech-
nology & Electronic Engineering , 19(1):10–26.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
InAdvances in neural information processing sys-
tems, pages 3104–3112.
Richard S Sutton, David A McAllester, Satinder P
Singh, and Yishay Mansour. 2000. Policy gradient
methods for reinforcement learning with function ap-
proximation. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems , pages 1057–1063.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever,
Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow, and
Rob Fergus. 2013. Intriguing properties of neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199 .
Oriol Vinyals and Quoc Le. 2015. A neural conversa-
tional model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05869 .
Richard Wallace. 2001. Artiﬁcial linguistic internet
computer entity (alice).
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. 1992. Q-
learning. Machine learning , 8(3-4):279–292.
Joseph Weizenbaum. 1966. Elizaa computer program
for the study of natural language communication be-
tween man and machine. Communications of the
ACM , 9(1):36–45.
John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2016. Towards universal paraphrastic sen-
tence embeddings. In 4th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan,
Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track Pro-
ceedings .
Ronald J Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-
following algorithms for connectionist reinforce-
ment learning. Machine learning , 8(3-4):229–256.
Marty J Wolf, K Miller, and Frances S Grodzinsky.
2017. Why we should have seen that coming: Com-
ments on microsoft’s tay experiment, and wider im-
plications. ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society ,
47(3):54–64.Han Xu, Yao Ma, Haochen Liu, Debayan Deb, Hui Liu,
Jiliang Tang, and Anil K. Jain. 2019. Adversarial
attacks and defenses in images, graphs and text: A
review. CoRR , abs/1909.08072.
Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu.
2017. Seqgan: Sequence generative adversarial nets
with policy gradient. In Thirty-First AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Xiaoyong Yuan, Pan He, Qile Zhu, and Xiaolin Li.
2019. Adversarial examples: Attacks and defenses
for deep learning. IEEE transactions on neural net-
works and learning systems .
Wei Emma Zhang, Quan Z Sheng, and Ahoud Abdul-
rahmn F Alhazmi. 2019. Generating textual adver-
sarial examples for deep learning models: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06796 .
Zhengli Zhao, Dheeru Dua, and Sameer Singh. 2017.
Generating natural adversarial examples. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.11342 .
Li Zhou, Jianfeng Gao, Di Li, and Heung-Yeung Shum.
2018. The design and implementation of xiaoice, an
empathetic social chatbot. CoRR , abs/1812.08989.