Title: ReCoRD: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Commonsense Reading Comprehension

ReCoCoRD: Bridging the Gap between Human
and Machine Commonsense Reading Comprehension
Sheng Zhangy, Xiaodong Liuz, Jingjing Liuz, Jianfeng Gaoz,
Kevin Duhyand Benjamin Van Durmey
yJohns Hopkins University
zMicrosoft Research
Abstract
We present a large-scale dataset, ReCoRD,
for machine reading comprehension requiring
commonsense reasoning. Experiments on this
dataset demonstrate that the performance of
state-of-the-art MRC systems fall far behind
human performance. ReCoRDrepresents a
challenge for future research to bridge the gap
between human and machine commonsense
reading comprehension. ReCoRDis available
athttp://nlp.jhu.edu/record .
1 Introduction
Machine reading comprehension (MRC) is a cen-
tral task in natural language understanding, with
techniques lately driven by a surge of large-scale
datasets (Hermann et al., 2015; Hill et al., 2015;
Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Trischler et al., 2017;
Nguyen et al., 2016), usually formalized as a task
of answering questions given a passage. An in-
creasing number of analyses (Jia and Liang, 2017;
Rajpurkar et al., 2018; Kaushik and Lipton, 2018)
have revealed that a large portion of questions in
these datasets can be answered by simply match-
ing the patterns between the question and the an-
swer sentence in the passage. While systems
may match or even outperform humans on these
datasets, our intuition suggests that there are at
least some instances in human reading compre-
hension that require more than what existing chal-
lenge tasks are emphasizing. One primary type
of questions these datasets lack are the ones that
require reasoning over common sense or under-
standing across multiple sentences in the pas-
sage (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Trischler et al., 2017).
To overcome this limitation, we introduce
a large-scale dataset for reading comprehen-
sion, ReCoRD (["rEk@rd] ), which consists of
over 120,000 examples, most of which require
Work done when Sheng Zhang was visiting Microsoft.
Passage
(Cloze-style) QueryAccording to claims in the suit, "Parts of 'Stairway to Heaven,' instantly recognizable to the music fans across the world, sound almost identical to signiﬁcant portions of ‘X.’”Reference AnswersTaurus(CNN) -- A lawsuit has been ﬁled claiming that the iconic Led Zeppelin song "Stairway to Heaven" was far from original. The suit, ﬁled on May 31 in the United States District Court Eastern District of Pennsylvania, was brought by the estate of the late musician Randy California against  the  surviving  members  of Led Zeppelin and  their  record  label.  The  copyright infringement case alleges that the Zeppelin song was taken from the single "Taurus" by the 1960s band Spirit, for whom California served as lead guitarist. "Late in 1968,  a  then  new  band  named Led  Zeppelin began touring in the United States, opening for Spirit," the suit states. "It was during this time that Jimmy Page, Led Zeppelin's guitarist, grew familiar with 'Taurus' and the rest of Spirit's catalog. Page stated in interviews that he found  Spirit to  be  'very  good'  and  that  the  band's performances struck him 'on an emotional level.' "• Suit claims similarities between two songs•Randy California was guitarist for the group Spirit•Jimmy Page has called the accusation "ridiculous"Figure 1: An example from ReCoRD. The passage is
a snippet from a news article followed by some bullet
points which summarize the news event. Named enti-
ties highlighted in the passage are possible answers to
the query. The query is a statement that is factually
supported by the passage. Xin the statement indicates
a missing named entity. The goal is to ﬁnd the correct
entity in the passage that best ﬁts X.
deep commonsense reasoning. ReCoRDis an
acronym for the Reading Comprehension with
Commonsense Reasoning Dataset.
Figure 1 shows a ReCoRDexample: the pas-
sage describes a lawsuit claiming that the band
“Led Zeppelin ” had plagiarized the song “ Taurus ”arXiv:1810.12885v1  [cs.CL]  30 Oct 2018
to their most iconic song, “ Stairway to Heaven ”.
The cloze-style query asks what does “ Stairway
to Heaven ” sound similar to. To ﬁnd the correct
answer, we need to understand from the passage
that “ a copyright infringement case alleges that
‘Stairway to Heaven’ was taken from ‘Taurus’ ”,
and from the bullet point that “ these two songs are
claimed similar ”. Then based on the common-
sense knowledge that “ if two songs are claimed
similar, it is likely that (parts of) these songs sound
almost identical ”, we can reasonably infer that the
answer is “ Taurus ”.
Differing from most of the existing MRC
datasets, all queries and passages in ReCoRDare
automatically mined from news articles, which
maximally reduces the human elicitation bias
(Gordon and Van Durme, 2013; Misra et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2017), and the data collection method
we propose is cost-efﬁcient. Further analysis
shows that a large portion of ReCoRDrequires
commonsense reasoning.
Experiments on ReCoRDdemonstrate that hu-
man readers are able to achieve a high perfor-
mance at 91.69 F1, whereas the state-of-the-art
MRC models fall far behind at 46.65 F1. Thus,
ReCoRDpresents a real challenge for future re-
search to bridge the gap between human and ma-
chine commonsense reading comprehension.
2 Task Motivation
A program has common sense if it auto-
matically deduces for itself a sufﬁciently
wide class of immediate consequences
of anything it is told and what it already
knows. – McCarthy (1959)
Commonsense Reasoning in MRC As illustrated
by the example in Figure 1, the commonsense
knowledge “ if two songs are claimed similar, it
is likely that (parts of) these songs sound almost
identica ” is not explicitly described in the pas-
sage, but is necessary to acquire in order to gen-
erate the answer. Human is able to infer the
answer because the commonsense knowledge is
commonly known by nearly all people. Our goal
is to evaluate whether a machine is able to learn
such knowledge. However, since commonsense
knowledge is massive and mostly implicit, deﬁn-
ing an explicit free-form evaluation is challeng-
ing (Levesque et al., 2011). Motivated by Mc-
Carthy (1959), we instead evaluate a machine’s
ability of commonsense reasoning – a reasoningprocess requiring commonsense knowledge; that
is, if a machine has common sense, it can de-
duce for itself the likely consequences or details
of anything it is told and what it already knows
rather than the unlikely ones. To formalize it in
MRC, given a passage p(i.e., “ anything it is told ”
and “ what it already knows ”), and a set of conse-
quences or detailsCwhich are factually supported
by the passage pwith different likelihood, if a
machine Mhas common sense, it can choose the
most likely consequence or detail cfromC, i.e.,
c= arg max
c2CP(cjp;M): (1)
Task Deﬁnition With the above discussion, we
propose a speciﬁc task to evaluate a machine’s
ability of commonsense reasoning in MRC: as
shown in Figure 1, given a passage pdescribing
an event, a set of text spans Emarked in p, and a
cloze-style query Q(X)with a missing text span
indicated by X, a machine Mis expected to act
like human, reading the passage pand then using
its hidden commonsense knowledge to choose a
text span e2Ethat best ﬁts X, i.e.,
e= arg max
e2EP(Q(e)jp;M): (2)
Once the cloze-style query Q(X)is ﬁlled in by
a text span e, the resulted statement Q(e)becomes
a consequence or detail cas described in Equa-
tion (1), which is factually supported by the pas-
sage with certain likelihood.
3 Data Collection
We describe the framework for automatically gen-
erating the dataset, ReCoRD, for our task deﬁned
in Equation (2), which consists of passages with
text spans marked, cloze-style queries, and refer-
ence answers. We collect ReCoRDin four stages
as shown in Figure 2: (1) curating CNN/Daily
Mail news articles, (2) generating passage-query-
answers triples based on the news articles, (3) ﬁl-
tering out the queries that can be easily answered
by state-of-the-art MRC models, and (4) ﬁltering
out the queries ambiguous to human readers.
3.1 News Article Curation
We choose to create ReCoRDby exploiting news
articles, because the structure of news makes it a
good source for our task: normally, the ﬁrst few
paragraphs of a news article summarize the news
Machine Filtering(244k triples)CNN/Daily Mail News Article Curation(170k news articles)ReCoRDHuman Filtering(120k triples)
 Passage-Query-Answers Generation(770k triples)
CoFigure 2: The overview of data collection stages.
event, which can be used to generate passages of
the task; and the rest of the news article provides
consequences or details of the news event, which
can be used to generate queries of the task. In
addition, news providers such as CNN and Daily
Mail supplement their articles with a number of
bullet points (Svore et al., 2007; Woodsend and
Lapata, 2010; Hermann et al., 2015), which out-
line the highlights of the news and hence form a
supplemental source for generating passages.
We ﬁrst downloaded CNN and Daily Mail news
articles using the script1provided by Hermann
et al. (2015), and then sampled 148K articles from
CNN and Daily Mail. In these articles, named en-
tities and their coreference information have been
annotated by a Google NLP pipeline, and will be
used in the second stage of our data collection.
Since these articles can be easily downloaded us-
ing the public script, we are concerned about po-
tential cheating if using them as the source for
generating the dev./test datasets. Therefore, we
crawled additional 22K news articles from the
CNN and Daily Mail websites. These crawled
articles have no overlap with the articles used
in Hermann et al. (2015). We then ran the state-
of-the-art named entity recognition model (Pe-
ters et al., 2018) and the end-to-end coreference
resolution model (Lee et al., 2017) provided by
AllenNLP (Gardner et al., 2018) to annotate the
crawled articles. Overall, we have collected 170K
CNN/Daily Mail news articles with their named
entities and coreference information annotated.
1https://github.com/deepmind/rc-data3.2 Passage-Query-Answers Generation
All passages, queries and answers in ReCoRD
were automatically generated from the curated
news articles. Figure 3 illustrates the generation
process. (1) we split each news article into two
parts as described in Section 3.1: the ﬁrst few
paragraphs which summarize the news event, and
the rest of the news which provides the details or
consequences of the news event. These two parts
make a good source for generating passages and
queries of our task respectively. (2) we enriched
the ﬁrst part of news article with the bullet points
provided by the news editors. The ﬁrst part of
news article, together with the bullet points, is con-
sidered as a candidate passage. To ensure that the
candidate passages are informative enough, we re-
quired the ﬁrst part of news article to have at least
100 tokens and contain at least four different en-
tities. (3) for each candidate passage, the second
part of its corresponding news article was split into
sentences by Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al.,
2014). Then we selected the sentences that sat-
isfy the following conditions as potential details or
consequences of the news event described by the
passage:
Sentences should have at least 10 tokens, as
longer sentences contain more information and
thus are more likely to be inferrable details or
consequences.
Sentences should not be questions, as we only
consider details or consequences of a news
event, not questions.
Sentences should not have 3-gram overlap with
the corresponding passage, so they are less
likely to be paraphrase of sentences in the pas-
sage.
Sentences should have at least one named entity,
so that we can replace it with Xto generate a
cloze-style query.
All named entities in sentences should have
precedents in the passage according to corefer-
ence, so that the sentences are not too discon-
nected from the passage, and the correct entity
can be found in the passage to ﬁll in X.
Finally, we generated queries by replacing enti-
ties in the selected sentences with X. We only
replaced one entity in the selected sentence each
time, and generated one cloze-style query. Based
on coreference, the precedents of the replaced en-
Copyright infringement suit filed against Led Zeppelin for ‘Stairway to Heaven’By Lisa Respers France, CNNupdated 12:49 PM EDT, Tue June 3, 2014STORY HIGHLIGHTS• Suit claims similarity between two songs• Randy California was guitarist for the group Spirit• Jimmy Page has called the accusation "ridiculous"(CNN) -- A lawsuit has been filed claiming that the iconic Led Zeppelin song "Stairway to Heaven" was far from original.The suit, filed on May 31 in the United States District Court Eastern District of Pennsylvania, was brought by the estate of the late musician Randy California against the surviving members of Led Zeppelin and their record label. The copyright infringement case alleges that the Zeppelin song was taken from the single "Taurus" by the 1960s band Spirit, for whom California served as lead guitarist."Late in 1968, a then new band named Led Zeppelin began touring in the United States, opening for Spirit," the suit states. "It was during this time that Jimmy Page, Led Zeppelin's guitarist, grew familiar with 'Taurus' and the rest of Spirit's catalog. Page stated in interviews that he found Spirit to be 'very good' and that the band's performances struck him 'on an emotional level.' "One of the causes of action for the suit is listed as "Falsification of Rock N' Roll History" and the typeface in the section headings of the filing resembles that used for Led Zeppelin album covers. According to claims in the suit, "Parts of 'Stairway to Heaven,' instantly recognizable to the music fans across the world, sound almost identical to significant portions of 'Taurus.' "…….Passage
(Cloze-style) QueryAccording to claims in the suit, "Parts of 'Stairway to Heaven,' instantly recognizable to the music fans across the world, sound almost identical to signiﬁcant portions of ‘X.’”Reference AnswersTaurus(CNN) -- A lawsuit has been ﬁled claiming that the iconic Led Zeppelin song "Stairway to Heaven" was far from original. The suit, ﬁled on May 31 in the United States District Court Eastern District of Pennsylvania, was brought by the estate of the late musician Randy California against  the  surviving  members  of Led Zeppelin and  their  record  label.  The  copyright infringement case alleges that the Zeppelin song was taken from the single "Taurus" by the 1960s band Spirit, for whom California served as lead guitarist. "Late in 1968,  a  then  new  band  named Led  Zeppelin began touring in the United States, opening for Spirit," the suit states. "It was during this time that Jimmy Page, Led Zeppelin's guitarist, grew familiar with 'Taurus' and the rest of Spirit's catalog. Page stated in interviews that he found  Spirit to  be  'very  good'  and  that  the  band's performances struck him 'on an emotional level.' "• Suit claims similarities between two songs•Randy California was guitarist for the group Spirit•Jimmy Page has called the accusation "ridiculous"The ﬁrst few paragraphs and the bullet points of the news article summarize the news event.The rest of the news article provides details or concequences of the new event.The hidden commonsense is used in comprehension of the underlined sentence (If two songs are claimed similar, it is likely that (parts of) these songs sound almost identical.)Figure 3: Passage-query-answers generation from a CNN news article.
tity in the passage became reference answers to
the query. The passage-query-answers genera-
tion process matched our task deﬁnition in Sec-
tion 2, and therefore created queries that require
some aspect of reasoning beyond immediate pat-
tern matching. In total, we generated 770k (pas-
sage, query, answers) triples.
3.3 Machine Filtering
As discussed in Jia and Liang (2017); Rajpurkar
et al. (2018); Wang and Bansal (2018); Kaushik
and Lipton (2018), existing MRC models mostly
learn to predict the answer by simply paraphrasing
questions into declarative forms, and then match-
ing them with the sentences in the passages. To
overcome this limitation, we ﬁltered out triples
whose queries can be easily answered by the state-
of-the-art MRC architecture, Stochastic Answer
Networks (SAN) (Liu et al., 2018). We choose
SAN because it is competitive on existing MRC
datasets, and it has components widely used in
many MRC architectures such that low bias was
anticipated in the ﬁltering (which is conﬁrmed by
evaluation in Section 5). We used SAN to perform
a ﬁve-fold cross validation on all 770k triples.
The SAN models correctly answered 68% of these
triples. We excluded those triples, and only kept
244k triples that could not be answered by SAN.
These triples contain queries which could not be
answered by simple paraphrasing, and other types
of reasoning such as commonsense reasoning and
multi-sentence reasoning are needed.3.4 Human Filtering
Since the ﬁrst three stages of data collection were
fully automated, the resulted triples could be noisy
and ambiguous to human readers. Therefore, we
employed crowdworkers to validate these triples.
We used Amazon Mechanical Turk for validation.
Crowdworkers were required to: 1) have a 95%
HIT acceptance rate, 2) a minimum of 50 HITs, 3)
be located in the United States, Canada, or Great
Britain, and 4) not be granted the qualiﬁcation of
poor quality (which we will explain later in this
section). Workers were asked to spend at least
30 seconds on each assignment, and paid $3.6 per
hour on average.
Figure 4 shows the crowdsourcing web inter-
face. Each HIT corresponds to a triple in our
data collection. In each HIT assignment, we ﬁrst
showed the expandable instructions for ﬁrst-time
workers, to help them better understand our task
(see the Appendix A.2). Then we presented work-
ers with a passage in which the named entities are
highlighted and clickable. After reading the pas-
sage, workers were given a supported statement
with a placeholder (i.e., a cloze-style query) in-
dicating a missing entity. Based on their under-
standing of the events that might be inferred from
the passage, workers were asked to ﬁnd the correct
entity in the passage that best ﬁts the placeholder.
If workers thought the answer is not obvious, they
were allowed to guess one, and were required to
report that case in the feedback box. Workers were
also encouraged to write other feedback.
Figure 4: The crowdsourcing web interface.
To ensure quality and prevent spamming, we
used the reference answers in the triples to com-
pute workers’ average performance after every
1000 submissions. While there might be corefer-
ence or named entity recognition errors in the ref-
erence answers, as reported in Chen et al. (2016)
(also conﬁrmed by our analysis in Section 4), they
only accounted for a very small portion of all
the reference answers. Thus, the reference an-
swers could be used for comparing workers’ per-
formance. Speciﬁcally, if a worker’s performance
was signiﬁcantly lower than the average perfor-
mance of all workers, we blocked the worker by
granting the qualiﬁcation of poor quality. In prac-
tice, workers were able to correctly answer about
50% of all queries. We blocked workers if their
average accuracy was lower than 20%, and then
republished their HIT assignments. Overall, 2,257
crowdworkers have participated in our task, and
51 of them have been granted the qualiﬁcation of
poor quality.
Train / Dev. / Test Splits Among all the 244k
triples collected from the third stage, we ﬁrst ob-
tained one worker answer for each triple. Com-
pared to the reference answers, workers correctly
answered queries in 122k triples. We then se-
lected around 100k correctly-answered triples as
the training set, restricting the origins of these
triples to the news articles used in Hermann et al.
(2015). As for the development and test sets, wesolicited another worker answer to further ensure
their quality. Therefore, each of the rest 22k triples
has been validated by two workers. We only kept
20k triples that were correctly answered by both
workers. The origins of these triples are either
articles used in Hermann et al. (2015) or articles
crawled by us (as described in Section 3.1), with a
ratio of 3:7. Finally, we randomly split the 20k
triples into development and test sets, with 10k
triples for each set. Table 1 summarizes the statis-
tics of our dataset, ReCoRD.
Train Dev. Test Overall
queries 100,730 10,000 10,000 120,730
unique passages 65,709 7,133 7,279 80,121
passage vocab. 352,491 93,171 94,386 395,356
query vocab. 119,069 30,844 31,028 134,397
tokens / passage 169.5 168.6 168.1 169.3
entities / passage 17.8 17.5 17.3 17.8
tokens / query 21.3 22.1 22.2 21.4
Table 1: Statistics of ReCoRD
4 Data Analysis
ReCoRDdiffers from other reading comprehen-
sion datasets due to its unique requirement for rea-
soning more than just paraphrasing. In this sec-
tion, we provide a qualitative analysis of ReCoRD
which highlights its unique features.
Reasoning Types We sampled 100 examples from
the development set, and then manually catego-
rized them into types shown in table 2. The results
show that signiﬁcantly different from existing
datasets such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016),
and NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2017), ReCoRD
requires commonsense reasoning to answer 75%
of queries. Owing to the machine ﬁltering stage,
only 3% queries could be answered by paraphras-
ing. The small percentage (6%) of ambiguous
queries demonstrate the beneﬁt of the human ﬁl-
tering stage. We also noticed that 10% queries can
be answered through partial clues. As the exam-
ple shows, some of partial clues were caused by
the incompleteness of named entity recognition in
the stage of news article curation.
Types of Commonsense Reasoning Formaliz-
ing the commonsense knowledge needed for even
simple reasoning problems is a huge undertaking.
Based on the observation of the sampled queries
that required commonsense reasoning, we roughly
categorized them into the following four coarse-
gained types:
Reasoning Description Example %
ParaphrasingThe answer sentence can be found
by paraphrasing the query with some
syntactic or lexical variation.P:. . . Ralph Roberts . . . then acquired other cable sys-
tems, changed the name of the company to Comcast and
ran the company until he was aged 82
Q:Xbegan acquiring smaller cable systems and built
the company into the nation’s ﬁfth-largest by 1988.
A:[Ralph Roberts]3%
Partial ClueAlthough a complete semantic match
cannot be found between the query
and the passage, the answer can be in-
ferred through partial clues, such as
some word/concept overlap.P:. . . Hani Al -Sibai says he has ‘severe mobility prob-
lems’ to get disability cash. . .
Q:However the photographs caught X-Sibai walking
with apparent ease in the sunshine.
A:[Hani Al]10%
Multi-sentence
ReasoningIt requires anaphora, or higher-level
fusion of multiple sentences to ﬁnd
the answer.P:Donald Trump is ofﬁcially a $10 billion man. . . HIs
campaign won’t release a copy of the ﬁnancial disclo-
sure even though the FEC says it can do so on its own. . .
Q:TheXcampaign did provide a one-page summary
of the billionaire’s investment portfolio, which is re-
markably modest for a man of his means.
A:[Donald Trump]6%
Commonsense
ReasoningIt requires inference drew on common
sense as well as multi-sentence rea-
soning to ﬁnd the answer.P:. . . Daniela Hantuchova knocks Venus Williams out
of Eastbourne 6-2 5-7 6-2 . . .
Q:Hantuchova breezed through the ﬁrst set in just un-
der 40 minutes after breaking Williams’ serve twice to
take it 6-2 and led the second 4-2 before Xhit her stride.
A:[Venus Williams]75%
AmbiguousThe passage is not informative
enough, or the query does not have a
unique answer.P:The supermarket wars have heated up with the
chief executive of Wesfarmers suggesting successful ri-
val Aldi may not be paying its fair share of tax in
Australia . . .
Q:X’s average corporate tax rate for the last three years
was almost 31 per cent of net proﬁt, and in 2013 it paid
$81.6 million in income tax.
A:[Aldi]6%
Table 2: An analysis of types of reasoning needed in 100 random samples from the dev. set of ReCoRD.
Conceptual Knowledge : the presumed knowl-
edge of properties of concepts (Miller, 1995; Liu
and Singh, 2004; Pas ¸ca and Van Durme, 2008;
Zhang et al., 2017).
Causal Reasoning : the causal bridging infer-
ence invoked between two events, which is vali-
dated against common sense (Singer et al., 1992;
Roemmele et al., 2011).
Na¨ıve Psychology : the predictable human men-
tal states in reaction to events (Stich and Raven-
scroft, 1994).
Other : Other types of common sense, such as
social norms, planning, spatial reasoning, etc.
We annotated one or more types to each of these
queries, and computed the percentage of them in
these queries as shown in Table 3.
5 Evaluation
We are interested in the performance of existing
MRC architectures on ReCoRD. According to thetask deﬁnition in Section 2, ReCoRDcan be for-
malized as two types of machine reading com-
prehension (MRC) datasets: passages with cloze-
style queries, or passages with queries whose
answers are spans in the passage. Therefore,
we can evaluate two types of MRC models on
ReCoRD, and compare them with human perfor-
mance. All the evaluation is carried out based on
the train /dev. /test split as illustrated in Table 1.
5.1 Methods
DocQA2(Clark and Gardner, 2018) is a strong
baseline model for queries with extractive an-
swers. It consists of components such as bi-
directional attention ﬂow (Seo et al., 2016) and
self attention which are widely used in MRC mod-
els. We also evaluate DocQA with ELMo (Peters
et al., 2018) to analyze the impact of largely pre-
trained encoder on our dataset.
2https://github.com/allenai/
document-qa
Reasoning Example %
Conceptual
KnowledgeP:Suspended hundreds of feet in the air amid glistening pillars of ice illuminated with ghostly
lights from below, this could easily be a computer-generated scene from the latest sci-ﬁ block-
buster movie. But in fact these ethereal photographs were taken in real life. . . captured by
photographer Thomas Senf as climber Stephan Siegrist , 43, scaled frozen waterfall. . .
Q:With bright lights illuminating his efforts from below, Mr Xappears to be on the set of a
sci-ﬁ movie.
A:[Stephan Siegrist]
Commonsense knowledge: Scenes such as “a person suspended hundreds of feet in the air
amid glistening pillars of ice illuminated with ghostly lights from below” tend to be found in
sci-ﬁ movies.49.3%
Causal
ReasoningP:. . . Jamie Lee Sharp , 25, stole keys to £40,000 Porsche Boxster during raid. . . He ﬁlmed him-
self boasting about the car before getting behind the wheel
Q:Xwas jailed for four years after pleading guilty to burglary, aggravated vehicle taking,
driving whilst disqualiﬁed, drink-driving and driving without insurance.
A:[Jamie Lee Sharp]
Commonsense knowledge: If a person steals a car, the person may be arrested and jailed.32.0%
Na¨ıve
PsychologyP:Uruguay star Diego Forlan said Monday that he is leaving Atletico Madrid and is set to join
Serie A Inter Milan . . . Forlan said “. . . At the age of 33, going to a club like Inter is not an
opportunity that comes up often. . . ”
Q:“I am happy with the decision that I have taken, it is normal that some players come and
others go,” Xadded.
A:[Diego Forlan, Forlan]
Commonsense knowledge: If a person has seized an valuable opportunity, the person will feel
happy for it.28.0%
OtherP:A British backpacker who wrote a romantic note to locate a handsome stranger after spot-
ting him on a New Zealand beach has ﬁnally met her Romeo for the ﬁrst time. Sarah Milne ,
from Glasgow , left a handmade poster for the man, who she saw in Picton on Friday. . . She
said she would return to the same spot in Picton , New Zealand , on Tuesday in search for
him. . . William Scott Chalmers revealed himself as the man and went to meet her. . .
Q:Mr Chalmers, who brought a bottle of champagne with him, walked over to where Milne
was sitting and said “Hello, I’m X, you know you could have just asked for my number.”
A:[William Scott Chalmers]
Commonsense knowledge: When two people meet each other for the ﬁrst time, they will likely
ﬁrst introduce themselves.12.0%
Table 3: An analysis of speciﬁc types of commonsense reasoning in 75 random sampled queries illustrated in
Table 2 which requires common sense reasoning. A query may require multiple types of commonsense reasoning.
.
QANet3(Yu et al., 2018) is one of the top MRC
models for SQuAD-style datasets. It is differ-
ent from many other MRC models due to the use
of transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). Through
QANet, we can evaluate the reasoning ability of
transformer on our dataset.
SAN4(Liu et al., 2018) is also a top-rank MRC
model. It shares many components with DocQA,
and employs a stochastic answer module. Since
we used SAN to ﬁlter out easy queries in our data
collection, it is necessary to verify that the queries
we collect is hard for not only SAN but also other
MRC architectures.
ASReader5(Kadlec et al., 2016) is a strong base-
line model for cloze-style datasets such as (Her-
3The ofﬁcial implementation of QANet is not released.
We use the implementation at https://github.com/
NLPLearn/QANet .
4https://github.com/kevinduh/san_mrc
5https://github.com/rkadlec/asreadermann et al., 2015; Hill et al., 2015). Unlike other
baseline models which search among all text spans
in the passage, ASReader directly predicts an-
swers from the candidate named entities.
Language Models6(LMs) (Trinh and Le, 2018)
trained on large corpora recently achieved the
state-of-the-art scores on the Winograd Schema
Challenge (Levesque et al., 2011). Following in
the same manner, we ﬁrst concatenate the passage
and the query together as a long sequence, and
substitute Xin the long sequence with each candi-
date entity; we use LMs to compute the probabil-
ity of each resultant sequence and the substitution
that results in the most probable sequence will be
the predicted answer.
Random Guess acts as the lower bound of the
evaluated models. It considers the queries in our
6https://github.com/tensorflow/models/
tree/master/research/lm_commonsense
dataset as cloze style, and randomly picks a candi-
date entity from the passage as the answer.
5.2 Human Performance
As described in Section 3.4, we obtained two
worker answers for each query in the development
and test sets, and conﬁrmed that each query has
been correctly answered by two different workers.
To get human performance, we obtained an addi-
tional worker answer for each query, and compare
it with the reference answers.
5.3 Metrics
We use two evaluation metrics similar to those
used by SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). Both
ignore punctuations and articles (e.g., a, an, the ).
Exact Match (EM) measures the percentage of
predictions that match any one of the reference an-
swers exactly.
(Macro-averaged) F1measures the average over-
lap between the prediction and the reference an-
swers. We treat the prediction and the reference
answer as bags of tokens, and compute their F1.
We take the maximum F1 over all of the reference
answers for a given query, and then average over
all of the queries.
5.4 Results
We show the evaluation results in Table 4. Hu-
mans are able to get 91.31 EM and 91.69 F1
on the set, with similar results on the develop-
ment set. In contrast, the best automatic method
– DocQA with ELMo – achieves 45.44 EM and
46.65 F1 on the test set, illustrating a signiﬁcant
gap between human and machine reading com-
prehension on ReCoRD. All other methods with-
out ELMo get EM/F1 scores signiﬁcantly lower
than DocQA with ELMo, which shows the posi-
tive impact of ELMo (see in Section 5.5). We also
note that SAN leads to a result comparable with
other strong baseline methods. This conﬁrms that
since SAN shares general components with many
MRC models, using it to do machine ﬁltering does
help us ﬁlter out queries that are relatively easy to
all the methods we evaluate. Finally, to our sur-
prise, the unsupervised method (i.e., LM) which
achieved the state-of-the-art scores on the Wino-
grad Schema Challenge only leads to a result sim-
ilar to the random guess baseline: a potential ex-
planation is the lack of domain knowledge on our
dataset. We leave this question for future work.Exact Match F1
Dev. Test Dev. Test
Human 91.28 91.31 91.64 91.69
DocQA w/ ELMo 44.13 45.44 45.39 46.65
DocQA w/o ELMo 36.59 38.52 37.89 39.76
SAN 38.14 39.77 39.09 40.72
QANet 35.38 36.51 36.75 37.79
ASReader 29.24 29.80 29.80 30.35
LM 16.73 17.57 17.41 18.15
Random Guess 18.41 18.55 19.06 19.12
Table 4: Performance of various methods and human.
5.5 Analysis
Human Errors About 8% dev./test queries have
not been correctly answered in the human evalua-
tion. We analyzed samples from these queries, and
found that in most queries human was able to nar-
row down the set of possible candidate entities, but
not able to ﬁnd a unique answer. In many cases,
two candidate entities equally ﬁt Xunless human
has the speciﬁc background knowledge. We show
an example in the Appendix A.1.
For the method analysis, we mainly ana-
lyzed the results of three representative methods:
DocQA w/ ELMo, DocQA, and QANet.
QANetDocQADocQA w/ ELMoHuman
HumanDocQA w/ ELMo
DocQAQANet
Figure 5: The Venn diagram of correct predictions from
various methods and human on the development set.
Impact of ELMo As shown in Figure 5, among all
three methods the correct predictions of DocQA
w/ ELMo have the largest overlap (92.6%) with
the human predictions. As an ablation study, we
analyzed queries which were only correctly an-
swered after ELMo was added. We found that in
some cases ELMo helped the prediction by incor-
porating the knowledge of language models. We
show an example in the Appendix A.1.
Predictions of QANet Figure 5 shows that QANet
correctly answered some ambiguous queries,
which we think was due to the randomness of
parameter initialization and did not reﬂect the
true reasoning ability. Since QANet uses the
transformer-based encoder and DocQA uses the
LSTM-based encoder, we see a signiﬁcant differ-
ence of predictions between QANet and DocQA.
Method OOC Rate
DocQA w/ ELMo 6.27%
DocQA 6.37%
QANet 6.41%
Table 5: The out-of-candidate-entities (OOC) rate of
three analyzed methods.
Impact of Cloze-style Setting Except ASReader,
all the MRC models were evaluated under the ex-
tractive setting, which means the information of
candidate named entities was not used. Instead,
extractive models searched answers from all pos-
sible text spans in passages. To show the poten-
tial beneﬁt of using the candidate entities in these
models, we computed the percentage of model
predictions that could not be found in the can-
didate entities. As shown in Table 5, all three
methods have about 6% OOC predictions. Mak-
ing use of the candidate entities would potentially
help them increase the performance by 6%.
In Section 4, we manually labeled 100 ran-
domly sampled queries with different types of rea-
soning. In Figure 6 and 7, we show the perfor-
mance of three analyzed methods on these queries.
CSR MSR Partial clue Paraphrasing Ambiguous010203040506070DocQA w/ ELMo DocQA QANet
Figure 6: Performance of three analyzed methods
on the 100 random samples with reasoning types la-
beled.(CSR stands for commonsense reasoning, and
MSR stands for multi-sentence reasoning.)
Figure 6 shows that three methods performed
poorly on queries requiring commonsense rea-
soning, multi-sentence reasoning and partial clue.Compared to DocQA, QANet performed better on
multi-sentence reasoning queries probably due to
the use of transformer. Also, QANet outperformed
DocQA on paraphrased queries probably because
we used SAN to ﬁltering queries and SAN has
an architecture similar to DocQA. As we expect,
ELMo improved the performance of DocQA on
paraphrased queries.
Conceptual Knowledge Naive Psychology Causality Other0102030405060DocQA w/ ELMo DocQA QANet
Figure 7: Performance of three analyzed methods on
75% of the random samples with speciﬁc common-
sense reasoning types labeled.
Among the 75% sampled queries that require
commonsense reasoning, we see that ELMo sig-
niﬁcantly improved the performance of common-
sense reasoning with presumed knowledge. For all
other types of commonsense reasoning, all three
methods have relatively poor performance.
6 Related Datasets
ReCoRD relates to two strands of research in
datasets: data for reading comprehension, and that
for commonsense reasoning.
Reading Comprehension The CNN/Daily Mail
Corpus (Hermann et al., 2015), The Children’s
Book Test (CBT) (Hill et al., 2015), and LAM-
BADA (Paperno et al., 2016) are closely related to
ReCoRD: (1) The CNN/Daily Mail Corpus con-
structed queries from the bullet points, most of
which required limited reasoning ability (Chen
et al., 2016). (2) CBT is a collection of 21 con-
secutive sentences from book excerpts, with one
word randomly removed from the last sentence.
Since CBT has no machine or human ﬁltering to
ensure quality, only a small portion of the CBT
examples really probes machines’ ability to under-
stand the context. (3) Built in a similar manner
to CBT, LAMBADA was ﬁltered to be human-
guessable in the broader context only. Differing
fromReCoRD, LAMBADA was designed to be a
language modeling problem where contexts were
not required to be event summaries, and answers
were not necessarily in the context.
Since all candidate answers were extracted from
in the passage, ReCoRDcan also be formalized as
a extractive MRC dataset, similar to SQuAD (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016) and NewsQA (Trischler et al.,
2017). The difference is that questions in these
datasets were curated from crowdworkers. Since
it is hard to control the quality of crowdsourced
questions, a large portion of questions in these
datasets can be answered by word matching or
paraphrasing (Jia and Liang, 2017; Rajpurkar
et al., 2018; Wang and Bansal, 2018). There are
other large-scale datasets (Nguyen et al., 2016;
Joshi et al., 2017; Lai et al., 2017; Dunn et al.,
2017; Kocisky et al., 2018; Reddy et al., 2018;
Choi et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018) targeting
different aspects of reading comprehension. See
(Gao et al., 2018) for a recent survey.
Commonsense Reasoning ROCStories Cor-
pus (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016), SWAG (Zellers
et al., 2018), and The Winograd Schema Chal-
lenge (WSC) (Levesque et al., 2011) are related
ReCoRD: (1) ROCStories assesses commonsense
reasoning in story understanding by choosing
the correct story ending from only two candi-
dates. Stories in the corpus were all curated
from crowdworkers, which could suffer from
human elicitation bias (Gordon and Van Durme,
2013; Misra et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017).
(2) SWAG uniﬁes commonsense reasoning and
natural language inference. It selects an ending
from multiple choices which is most likely to
be anticipated from the situation describe in
the premise. The counterfactual endings in
SWAG were generated using language models
with adversarial ﬁltering. (3) WSC foucses on
intra-sentential pronoun disambiguation problems
that require commonsense reasoning. There are
other datasets (Roemmele et al., 2011; Zhang
et al., 2017; Rashkin et al., 2018a,b) targeting
different aspects of commonsense reasoning.
7 Conclusion
We introduced ReCoRD, a large-scale reading
comprehension dataset requiring commonsense
reasoning. Unlike existing machine reading com-
prehension (MRC) datasets, ReCoRDcontains a
large portion of queries that require commonsense
reasoning to be answered. Our baselines, includ-
ing top performers on existing MRC datasets, areno match for human competence on ReCoRD. We
hope that ReCoRDwill spur more research in
MRC with commonsense reasoning.
References
Danqi Chen, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2016. A thorough examination of the
cnn/daily mail reading comprehension task. In Pro-
ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 2358–2367, Berlin, Germany. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Eunsol Choi, He He, Mohit Iyyer, Mark Yatskar, Wen-
tau Yih, Yejin Choi, Percy Liang, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2018. Quac: Question answering in context.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07036 .
Christopher Clark and Matt Gardner. 2018. Simple
and effective multi-paragraph reading comprehen-
sion. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 845–855. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Matthew Dunn, Levent Sagun, Mike Higgins, V Ugur
Guney, V olkan Cirik, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2017.
Searchqa: A new q&a dataset augmented with
context from a search engine. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.05179 .
Jianfeng Gao, Michel Galley, and Lihong Li. 2018.
Neural approaches to conversational ai. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1809.08267 .
Matt Gardner, Joel Grus, Mark Neumann, Oyvind
Tafjord, Pradeep Dasigi, Nelson Liu, Matthew Pe-
ters, Michael Schmitz, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018.
Allennlp: A deep semantic natural language pro-
cessing platform. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07640 .
Jonathan Gordon and Benjamin Van Durme. 2013. Re-
porting bias and knowledge acquisition. In Proceed-
ings of the 2013 Workshop on Automated Knowledge
Base Construction , AKBC ’13, pages 25–30, New
York, NY , USA. ACM.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tom ´aˇs Ko ˇcisk´y, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Su-
leyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching ma-
chines to read and comprehend. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems , pages 1693–
1701.
Felix Hill, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Jason
Weston. 2015. The goldilocks principle: Reading
children’s books with explicit memory representa-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02301 .
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2017. Adversarial exam-
ples for evaluating reading comprehension systems.
InProceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2021–2031, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehen-
sion. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1601–1611, Vancouver,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rudolf Kadlec, Martin Schmid, Ond ˇrej Bajgar, and Jan
Kleindienst. 2016. Text understanding with the at-
tention sum reader network. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
908–918. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Divyansh Kaushik and Zachary C. Lipton. 2018. How
much reading does reading comprehension require?
a critical investigation of popular benchmarks.
Tomas Kocisky, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom,
Chris Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gabor Melis, and
Edward Grefenstette. 2018. The narrativeqa reading
comprehension challenge. Transactions of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , 6:317–328.
Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang,
and Eduard Hovy. 2017. Race: Large-scale reading
comprehension dataset from examinations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 785–
794, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Kenton Lee, Luheng He, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2017. End-to-end neural coreference reso-
lution. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 188–197, Copenhagen, Denmark. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Hector J Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgen-
stern. 2011. The winograd schema challenge. In
Aaai spring symposium: Logical formalizations of
commonsense reasoning .
H. Liu and P. Singh. 2004. Conceptnet &mdash; a
practical commonsense reasoning tool-kit. BT Tech-
nology Journal , 22(4):211–226.
Xiaodong Liu, Yelong Shen, Kevin Duh, and Jianfeng
Gao. 2018. Stochastic answer networks for ma-
chine reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the
56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
1694–1704. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL) System Demonstrations ,
pages 55–60.John McCarthy. 1959. Programs with common sense.
InProceedings of the Teddington Conference on the
Mechanization of Thought Processes , London: Her
Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce.
George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database
for english. Commun. ACM , 38(11):39–41.
Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, Margaret Mitchell,
and Ross Girshick. 2016. Seeing through the human
reporting bias: Visual classiﬁers from noisy human-
centric labels. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pages 2930–2939.
Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong
He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Vanderwende,
Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016. A cor-
pus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding of
commonsense stories. In Proceedings of the 2016
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies , pages 839–849, San Diego,
California. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao,
Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and Li Deng.
2016. Ms marco: A human generated machine
reading comprehension dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.09268 .
Denis Paperno, Germ ´an Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazari-
dou, Ngoc Quan Pham, Raffaella Bernardi, San-
dro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and
Raquel Fernandez. 2016. The lambada dataset:
Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context.
InProceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers) , pages 1525–1534. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Marius Pas ¸ca and Benjamin Van Durme. 2008.
Weakly-supervised acquisition of open-domain
classes and class attributes from web documents and
query logs. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT , pages
19–27. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word repre-
sentations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 2227–
2237. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
tions for squad. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 784–789.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 2383–2392, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hannah Rashkin, Antoine Bosselut, Maarten Sap,
Kevin Knight, and Yejin Choi. 2018a. Modeling
naive psychology of characters in simple common-
sense stories. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2289–
2299. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hannah Rashkin, Maarten Sap, Emily Allaway,
Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2018b.
Event2mind: Commonsense inference on events,
intents, and reactions. In Proceedings of the 56th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 463–473. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Siva Reddy, Danqi Chen, and Christopher D Manning.
2018. Coqa: A conversational question answering
challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07042 .
Melissa Roemmele, Cosmin Adrian Bejan, and An-
drew S Gordon. 2011. Choice of plausible alterna-
tives: An evaluation of commonsense causal reason-
ing. In AAAI Spring Symposium: Logical Formal-
izations of Commonsense Reasoning , pages 90–95.
Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2016. Bidirectional attention
ﬂow for machine comprehension. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01603 .
Murray Singer, Michael Halldorson, Jeffrey C Lear,
and Peter Andrusiak. 1992. Validation of causal
bridging inferences in discourse understanding.
Journal of Memory and Language , 31(4):507 – 524.
Stephen Stich and Ian Ravenscroft. 1994. What is folk
psychology? Cognition , 50(1-3):447–468.
Krysta Svore, Lucy Vanderwende, and Christopher
Burges. 2007. Enhancing single-document sum-
marization by combining RankNet and third-party
sources. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL) , pages 448–457,
Prague, Czech Republic. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Trieu H Trinh and Quoc V Le. 2018. A simple
method for commonsense reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.02847 .
Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Har-
ris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Ka-
heer Suleman. 2017. Newsqa: A machine compre-
hension dataset. In Proceedings of the 2nd Work-
shop on Representation Learning for NLP , pages191–200, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , pages 5998–6008.
Yicheng Wang and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Robust ma-
chine comprehension models via adversarial train-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 575–581.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Auto-
matic generation of story highlights. In Proceed-
ings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , pages 565–574, Up-
psala, Sweden. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Ben-
gio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A
dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
answering. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) .
Adams Wei Yu, David Dohan, Minh-Thang Luong, Rui
Zhao, Kai Chen, Mohammad Norouzi, and Quoc V
Le. 2018. Qanet: Combining local convolution
with global self-attention for reading comprehen-
sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09541 .
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Roy Schwartz, and Yejin
Choi. 2018. Swag: A large-scale adversarial dataset
for grounded commonsense inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Sheng Zhang, Rachel Rudinger, Kevin Duh, and Ben-
jamin Van Durme. 2017. Ordinal common-sense in-
ference. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , 5:379–395.
A Appendices
A.1 Case Study
Human Error Table 6 shows an example where
the ambiguous query caused human error. The
passage in this example describes “ ambiverts ”,
and there are two experts studying it: “ Vanessa
Van Edwards ” and “ Adam Grant ”. Both of them
ﬁt in the query asking who gave advice to am-
biverts. There is no further information to help
human choose a unique answer for this query.
Passage: Your colleagues think you’re quiet, but your
friends think you’re a party animal. If that sounds like
you, then you may be what psychologists describe as an
’ambivert’. Scientists believe around two-thirds of peo-
ple are ambiverts; a personality category that has, up un-
til now, been given relatively little attention. ’Most peo-
ple who are ambiverts have been told the wrong category
their whole life,’ Vanessa Van Edwards , an Orgeon -based
behavioural expert, told DailyMail.com ’You hear extro-
vert and you hear introvert, and you think ’ugh, that’s not
me’.’ Ambiversion is a label that has been around for
some time, but gained popularity in 2013 with a paper
in the journal Psychological Science , by Adam Grant the
University of Pennsylvania .
Most ambiverts have been labelled incorrectly their
whole life
They slide up and down personality spectrum depend-
ing on the situation
Ambiverts are good at gaining people’s trust and mak-
ing their point heard
They often feel pressure to mirror personality of the
person they are with
Query: ’Read each situation more carefully,’ Xadvised
ambiverts, ’and ask yourself, ’What do I need to do right
now to be most happy or successful?”
Reference answers: Adam Grant
Table 6: An example illustrating a ambiguous query.
Impact of ELMo Table 7 shows an example
where DocQA w/ ELMo correctly answered but
DocQA failed. The passage in this example
describes a woman artist “ Sarah Milne ” who
launched a public appeal to ﬁnd a handsome
stranger “ William Scott Chalmers ”, and invited
him to meet her. The query asks the missing
information in the greetings from “ William Scott
Chalmers ” when he went to meet “ Sarah Milne ”.
Our common sense about social norms tells us
when two people meet each other for the ﬁrst time,
they are very likely to ﬁrst introduce themselves.
In the query of this example, when Mr. Chalmers
said “ Hello, I’m . . . ”, it is very likely that he was
introducing himself. Therefore, the name of Mr
Chalmer ﬁt Xbest.In this example, the prediction of DocQA with-
out ELMo is “ New Zealand ” which is not even
close to the reference answer. The beneﬁt of using
ELMo in this example is that its language model
will help exclude “ New Zealand ” from the likely
candidate answers, because “ I’m . . . ” is usually
followed by a person name rather than a location
name. Such a pattern learnt by ELMo is useful in
narrowing down candidiate answers in ReCoRD.
Passage: A British backpacker who wrote a romantic
note to locate a handsome stranger after spotting him on
a New Zealand beach has ﬁnally met her Romeo for the
ﬁrst time. Sarah Milne , from Glasgow , left a handmade
poster for the man, who she saw in Picton on Friday and
described as ’shirtless, wearing black shorts with stars tat-
tooed on his torso and running with a curly, bouncy and
blonde dog’. In her note, entitled ’Is this you? ’, she in-
vited the mystery stranger to meet her on the same beach
on Tuesday. But the message soon became a source of
huge online interest with the identity of both the author
and its intended target generating unexpected publicity.
Sarah Milne , a Glasgow artist, launched a public ap-
peal to ﬁnd the mystery man
She wrote a heart-warming message and drew a picture
of him with his dog
She said she would return to the same spot in Picton ,
New Zealand , on Tuesday in search for him
William Scott Chalmers revealed himself as the man
and went to meet her
He told Daily Mail Australia that he would ask her out
for dinner
Query: Mr Chalmers, who brought a bottle of cham-
pagne with him, walked over to where Milne was sitting
and said ’Hello, I’m X, you know you could have just
asked for my number.’
Reference answers: William Scott Chalmers
Table 7: An example illustrating the impact of ELMo.
A.2 HIT Instructions
We show the instructions for Amazon Mechanical
Turk HITs in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Amazon Mechanical Turk HIT Instructions.