Title: Three scenarios for continual learning

Three scenarios for continual learning
Gido M. van de Ven1;2& Andreas S. Tolias1;3
1Center for Neuroscience and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston
2Computational and Biological Learning Lab, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
3Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston
{ven,astolias}@bcm.edu
Abstract
Standard artiﬁcial neural networks suffer from the well-known issue of catastrophic
forgetting, making continual or lifelong learning difﬁcult for machine learning.
In recent years, numerous methods have been proposed for continual learning,
but due to differences in evaluation protocols it is difﬁcult to directly compare
their performance. To enable more structured comparisons, we describe three
continual learning scenarios based on whether at test time task identity is provided
and—in case it is not—whether it must be inferred. Any sequence of well-deﬁned
tasks can be performed according to each scenario. Using the split and permuted
MNIST task protocols, for each scenario we carry out an extensive comparison
of recently proposed continual learning methods. We demonstrate substantial
differences between the three scenarios in terms of difﬁculty and in terms of how
efﬁcient different methods are. In particular, when task identity must be inferred
(i.e., class incremental learning), we ﬁnd that regularization-based approaches (e.g.,
elastic weight consolidation) fail and that replaying representations of previous
experiences seems required for solving this scenario.
1 Introduction
Current state-of-the-art deep neural networks can be trained to impressive performance on a wide
variety of individual tasks. Learning multiple tasks in sequence, however, remains a substantial
challenge for deep learning. When trained on a new task, standard neural networks forget most
of the information related to previously learned tasks, a phenomenon referred to as “catastrophic
forgetting”.
In recent years, numerous methods for alleviating catastrophic forgetting have been proposed. How-
ever, due to the wide variety of experimental protocols used to evaluate them, many of these methods
claim “state-of-the-art” performance [e.g., 1,2,3,4,5,6]. To obscure things further, some methods
shown to perform well in some experimental settings are reported to dramatically fail in others:
compare the performance of elastic weight consolidation in Kirkpatrick et al. [1]and Zenke et al. [7]
with that in Kemker et al. [8] and Kamra et al. [9].
To enable more structured comparisons of methods for reducing catastrophic forgetting, this report
describes three distinct continual learning scenarios of increasing difﬁculty. These scenarios are
distinguished by whether at test time task identity is provided and, if it is not, whether task identity
must be inferred. We show that there are substantial differences between these three scenarios in
terms of their difﬁculty and in terms of how effective different continual learning methods are on
them. Moreover, using the split and permuted MNIST task protocols, we illustrate that any continual
learning problem consisting of a series of clearly separated tasks can be performed according to all
three scenarios.
This is an extended version of work presented at the NeurIPS Continual Learning workshop (2018).arXiv:1904.07734v1  [cs.LG]  15 Apr 2019
As a second contribution, for each of the three scenarios we then provide an extensive comparison
of recently proposed methods. These experiments reveal that even for experimental protocols
involving the relatively simple classiﬁcation of MNIST-digits, regularization-based approaches
(e.g., elastic weight consolidation) completely fail when task identity needs to be inferred. We
ﬁnd that currently only replay-based approaches have the potential to perform well on all three
scenarios. Well-documented and easy-to-adapt code for all compared methods is made available:
https://github.com/GMvandeVen/continual-learning .
2 Three Continual Learning Scenarios
We focus on the continual learning problem in which a single neural network model needs to
sequentially learn a series of tasks. During training, only data from the current task is available and
the tasks are assumed to be clearly separated. This problem has been actively studied in recent years
and many methods for alleviating catastrophic forgetting have been proposed. However, because of
differences in the experimental protocols used for their evaluation, comparing methods’ performances
can be difﬁcult. In particular, one difference between experimental protocols we found to be very
inﬂuential for the level of difﬁculty is whether at test time information about the task identity is
available and—if it is not—whether the model is also required to explicitly identify the identity of the
task it has to solve. Importantly, this means that even when studies use exactly the same sequence of
tasks to be learned (i.e., the same task protocol), results are not necessarily comparable. In the hope
to standardize evaluation and to enable more meaningful comparisons across papers, we describe
three distinct scenarios for continual learning of increasing difﬁculty (Table 1). This categorization
scheme was ﬁrst introduced in a previous paper by us [ 10] and has since been adopted by several
other studies [11, 12, 13]; the purpose of the current report is to provide a more in-depth treatment.
Table 1: Overview of the three continual learning scenarios.
Scenario Required at test time
Task-IL Solve tasks so far, task-ID provided
Domain-IL Solve tasks so far, task-ID not provided
Class-IL Solve tasks so far andinfer task-ID
In the ﬁrst scenario, models are always informed about which task needs to be performed. This is
the easiest continual learning scenario, and we refer to it as task-incremental learning (Task-IL) .
Since task identity is always provided, in this scenario it is possible to train models with task-speciﬁc
components. A typical network architecture used in this scenario has a “multi-headed” output layer,
meaning that each task has its own output units but the rest of the network is (potentially) shared
between tasks.
In the second scenario, which we refer to as domain-incremental learning (Domain-IL) , task
identity is not available at test time. Models however only need to solve the task at hand; they are
not required to infer which task it is. Typical examples of this scenario are protocols whereby the
structure of the tasks is always the same, but the input-distribution is changing. A relevant real-world
example is an agent who needs to learn to survive in different environments, without the need to
explicitly identify the environment it is confronted with.
Finally, in the third scenario, models must be able to both solve each task seen so far andinfer which
task they are presented with. We refer to this scenario as class-incremental learning (Class-IL) , as
it includes the common real-world problem of incrementally learning new classes of objects.
2.1 Comparison with Single-Headed vs Multi-Headed Categorization Scheme
In another recent attempt to structure the continual learning literature, a distinction is highlighted
between methods being evaluated using a “multi-headed” or a “single-headed” layout [ 14,15]. This
distinction relates to the scenarios we describe here in the sense that a multi-headed layout requires
task identity to be known, while a single-headed layout does not. Our proposed categorization
however differs in two important ways.
2
Figure 1: Schematic of split MNIST task protocol.
Table 2: Split MNIST according to each scenario.
Task-ILWith task given, is it the 1stor 2ndclass?
(e.g., 0or1)
Domain-ILWith task unknown, is it a 1stor 2ndclass?
(e.g., in [0;2;4;6;8]or in [1;3;5;7;9])
Class-ILWith task unknown, which digit is it?
(i.e., choice from 0to9)
Firstly, the multi-headed vs single-headed distinction is tied to the architectural layout of a network’s
output layer, while our scenarios more generally reﬂect the conditions under which a model is
evaluated. Although in the continual learning literature a multi-headed layout (i.e., using a separate
output layer for each task) is the most common way to use task identity information, it is not the only
way. Similarly, a single-headed layout (i.e., using the same output-layer for every task) might by
itself not require task identity to be known, it is still possible for the model to use task identity in
other ways (e.g., in its hidden layers, as in [4]).
Secondly, our categorization scheme extends upon the multi-headed vs single-headed split by recog-
nizing that when task identity is not provided, there is a further distinction depending on whether the
network is explicitly required to infer task identity. Importantly, we will show that the two scenarios
resulting from this additional split substantially differ in difﬁculty (see section 5).
2.2 Example Task Protocols
To demonstrate the difference between the three continual learning scenarios, and to illustrate that
any task protocol can be performed according to each scenario, we will perform two different task
protocols for all three scenarios.
The ﬁrst task protocol is sequentially learning to classify MNIST-digits (‘split MNIST’ [ 7]; Figure 1).
In the recent literature, this task protocol has been performed under the Task-IL scenario (in which
case it is sometimes referred to as ‘multi-headed split MNIST’) and under the Class-IL scenario (in
which case it is referred to as ‘single-headed split MNIST’), but it could also be performed under the
Domain-IL scenario (Table 2).
The second task protocol is ‘permuted MNIST’ [ 16], in which each task involves classifying all ten
MNIST-digits but with a different permutation applied to the pixels for every new task (Figure 2).
Although permuted MNIST is most naturally performed according to the Domain-IL scenario, it can
be performed according to the other scenarios too (Table 3).
2.3 Task Boundaries
The scenarios described in this report assume that during training there are clear and well-deﬁned
boundaries between the tasks to be learned. If there are no such boundaries between tasks—for
example because transitions between tasks are gradual or continuous—the scenarios we describe here
no longer apply, and the continual learning problem becomes less structured and potentially a lot
harder. Among others, training with randomly-sampled minibatches and multiple passes over each
task’s training data are no longer possible. We refer to [ 12] for a recent insightful treatment of the
paradigm without well-deﬁned task-boundaries.
3
Figure 2: Schematic of permuted MNIST task protocol.
Table 3: Permuted MNIST according to each scenario.
Task-IL Given permutation X, which digit?
Domain-IL With permutation unknown, which digit?
Class-IL Which digit andwhich permutation?
3 Strategies for Continual Learning
3.1 Task-speciﬁc Components
A simple explanation for catastrophic forgetting is that after a neural network is trained on a new
task, its parameters are optimized for the new task and no longer for the previous one(s). This
suggests that not optimizing the entire network on each task could be one strategy for alleviating
catastrophic forgetting. A straightforward way to do this is to explicitly deﬁne a different sub-network
per task. Several recent papers use this strategy, with different approaches for selecting the parts
of the network for each task. A simple approach is to randomly assign which nodes participate in
each task ( Context-dependent Gating [XdG; 4]). Other approaches use evolutionary algorithms [ 17]
or gradient descent [ 18] to learn which units to employ for each task. By design, these approaches
are limited to the Task-IL scenario, as task identity is required to select the correct task-speciﬁc
components.
3.2 Regularized Optimization
When task identity information is not available at test time, an alternative strategy is to still prefer-
entially train a different part of the network for each task, but to always use the entire network for
execution. One way to do this is by differently regularizing the network’s parameters during training
on each new task, which is the approach of Elastic Weight Consolidation [EWC; 1] and Synaptic
Intelligence [SI;7]. Both methods estimate for all parameters of the network how important they are
for the previously learned tasks and penalize future changes to them accordingly (i.e., learning is
slowed down for parts of the network important for previous tasks).
3.3 Modifying Training Data
An alternative strategy for alleviating catastrophic forgetting is to complement the training data for
each new task to be learned with “pseudo-data” representative of the previous tasks. This strategy is
referred to as replay.
One option is to take the input data of the current task, label them using the model trained on the
previous tasks, and use the resulting input-target pairs as pseudo-data. This is the approach of
Learning without Forgetting [LwF; 19]. An important aspect of this method is that instead of labeling
the replayed inputs as the most likely category according to the previous tasks’ model (i.e., “hard
targets”), it pairs them with the predicted probabilities for alltarget classes (i.e., “soft targets”). The
objective for the replayed data is to match the probabilities predicted by the model being trained to
these target probabilities. The approach of matching predicted probabilities of one network to those
of another network had previously been used to compress (or “distill”) information from one (large)
network to another (smaller) network [20].
An alternative is to generate the input data to be replayed. For this, besides the main model for task
performance (e.g., classiﬁcation), a separate generative model is sequentially trained on all tasks
4
to generate samples from their input data distributions. For the ﬁrst application of this approach,
which was called Deep Generative Replay (DGR), the generated input samples were paired with
“hard targets” provided by the main model [ 21]. We note that it is possible to combine DGR with
distillation by replaying input samples from a generative model and pairing them with soft targets
[see also 6, 22]. We include this hybrid method in our comparison under the name DGR+distill.
A ﬁnal option is to store data from previous tasks and replay those. Such “exact replay” has been
used in various forms to successfully boost continual learning performance in classiﬁcation settings
[e.g., 2,3,5]. A disadvantage of this approach is that it is not always possible, for example due to
privacy concerns or memory constraints.
3.4 Using Exemplars
If it is possible to store data from previous tasks, another strategy for alleviating catastrophic forgetting
is to use stored data as “exemplars” during execution. A recent method that successfully used this
strategy is iCaRL [2]. This method uses a neural network for feature extraction and performs
classiﬁcation based on a nearest-class-mean rule [ 23] in that feature space, whereby the class means
are calculated from the stored data. To protect the feature extractor network from becoming unsuitable
for previously learned tasks, iCaRL also replays the stored data—as well as the current task inputs
with a special form of distillation—during training of the feature extractor.
4 Experimental Details
In order to both explore the differences between the three continual learning scenarios and to
comprehensively compare the performances of the above discussed approaches, we evaluated various
recently proposed methods according to each scenario on both the split and permuted MNIST task
protocols.
4.1 Task Protocols
For split MNIST, the original MNIST-dataset was split into ﬁve tasks, where each task was a two-way
classiﬁcation. The original 28x28 pixel grey-scale images were used without pre-processing. The
standard training/test-split was used resulting in 60,000 training images ( 6000 per digit) and 10,000
test images (1000 per digit).
For permuted MNIST, a sequence of ten tasks was used. Each task is now a ten-way classiﬁcation.
To generate the permutated images, the original images were ﬁrst zero-padded to 32x32 pixels. For
each task, a random permutation was then generated and applied to these 1024 pixels. No other
pre-processing was performed. Again the standard training/test-split was used.
4.2 Methods
For a fair comparison, the same neural network architecture was used for all methods. This was
a multi-layer perceptron with 2 hidden layers of 400 (split MNIST) or 1000 (permuted MNIST)
nodes each. ReLU non-linearities were used in all hidden layers. Except for iCaRL, the ﬁnal layer
was a softmax output layer. In the Task-IL scenario, all methods used a multi-headed output layer,
meaning that each task had its own output units and always only the output units of the task under
consideration—i.e., either the current task or the replayed task—were active. In the Domain-IL
scenario, all methods were implemented with a single-headed output layer, meaning that each task
used the same output units (with each unit corresponding to one class in every task). In the Class-IL
scenario, each class had its own output unit and always all units of the classes seen so far were active
(see also sections A.1.1 and A.1.2 in the Appendix).
We compared the following methods:
- XdG: Following Masse et al. [4], for each task a random subset of X%of the units in each hidden
layer was fully gated (i.e., their activations set to zero), with Xa hyperparameter whose
value was set by a grid search (see section D in the Appendix). As this method requires
availability of task identity at test time, it can only be used in the Task-IL scenario.
5
- EWC / Online EWC / SI: For these methods a regularization term was added to the loss, with
regularization strength controlled by a hyperparameter: Ltotal=Lcurrent +Lregularization .
The value of this hyperparameter was again set by a grid search. The way the regularization
terms of these methods are calculated differs ([ 1,24,7]; see section A.2 in the Appendix),
but they all aim to penalize changes to parameters estimated to be important for previously
learned tasks.
- LwF / DGR / DGR+distill: For these methods a loss-term for replayed data was added to the loss
of the current task. In this case a hyperparameter could be avoided, as the loss for the current
and replayed data was weighted according to how many tasks the model had been trained
on so far:Ltotal=1
Ntasks so farLcurrent + (1 1
Ntasks so far)Lreplay.
For LwF, images of the current task were replayed with soft targets provided by a
copy of the model stored after ﬁnishing training on the previous task ([ 19]; see also
section A.1.2 in the Appendix).
For DGR, a separate generative model (see below) was trained to generate the images
to be replayed. Following Shin et al. [21], the replayed images were labeled with the
most likely category predicted by a copy of the main model stored after training on the
previous task (i.e., hard targets).
For DGR+distill, also a separate generative model was trained to generate the images
to be replayed, but these were then paired with soft targets (as in LwF) instead of hard
targets (as in DGR).
- iCaRL: This method was implemented following Rebufﬁ et al. [2]; see section A.4 in the Appendix
for details. For the results in Tables 4 and 5, a memory budget of 2000 was used. Due to the
way iCaRL is set up with distillation of current task data on the classes of all previous tasks
using binary classiﬁcation loss, it can only be applied in the Class-IL scenario. However,
two components of iCaRL—the use of exemplars for classiﬁcation and the replay of stored
data during training—are suitable for all scenarios. Both these components are explored in
section C in the Appendix.
We included the following two baselines:
- None: The model was sequentially trained on all tasks in the standard way. This is also called
ﬁne-tuning , and can be seen as a lower bound.
- Ofﬂine: The model was always trained using the data of all tasks so far. This is also called joint
training , and was included as it can be seen as an upper bound.
All methods except for iCaRL used the standard multi-class cross entropy classiﬁcation loss for the
model’s predictions on the current task data ( Lcurrent =Lclassiﬁcation ). For the split MNIST protocol, all
models were trained for 2000 iterations per task using the ADAM-optimizer ( 1= 0:9,2= 0:999;
[25]) with learning rate 0.001. The same optimizer was used for the permuted MNIST protocol,
but with 5000 iterations and learning rate 0.0001. For each iteration, Lcurrent (andLregularization ) was
calculated as average over 128 samples from the current task. If replay was used, in each iteration
also 128 replayed samples were used to calculate Lreplay.
For DGR and DGR+distill, a separate generative model was sequentially trained on all tasks. A
symmetric variational autoencoder [V AE; 26] was used as generative model, with 2 fully connected
hidden layers of 400 (split MNIST) or 1000 (permuted MNIST) units and a stochastic latent variable
layer of size 100. A standard normal distribution was used as prior. See section A.3 in the Appendix
for more details. Training of the generative model was also done with generative replay (provided by
its own copy stored after ﬁnishing training on the previous task) and with the same hyperparameters
(i.e., learning rate, optimizer, iterations, batch sizes) as for the main model.
5 Results
For the split MNIST task protocol, we found a clear difference in difﬁculty between the three continual
learning scenarios (Table 4). All of the tested methods performed well in the Task-IL scenario, but
LwF and especially the regularization-based methods (EWC, Online EWC and SI) struggled in the
Domain-IL scenario and completely failed in the Class-IL scenario. Importantly, only methods using
replay (DGR, DGR+distill and iCaRL) obtained good performance (above 90%) in the Domain-IL
6
Table 4: Average test accuracy (over all tasks) on the split MNIST task protocol. Each experiment
was performed 20 times with different random seeds, reported is the mean ( SEM) over these runs.
Approach Method Task-IL Domain-IL Class-IL
BaselinesNone – lower bound 87.19 ( 0.94) 59.21 (2.04) 19.90 (0.02)
Ofﬂine – upper bound 99.66 ( 0.02) 98.42 (0.06) 97.94 (0.03)
Task-speciﬁc XdG 99.10 ( 0.08) - -
RegularizationEWC 98.64 ( 0.22) 63.95 (1.90) 20.01 (0.06)
Online EWC 99.12 ( 0.11) 64.32 (1.90) 19.96 (0.07)
SI 99.09 ( 0.15) 65.36 (1.57) 19.99 (0.06)
ReplayLwF 99.57 ( 0.02) 71.50 (1.63) 23.85 (0.44)
DGR 99.50 ( 0.03) 95.72 (0.25) 90.79 (0.41)
DGR+distill 99.61 ( 0.02) 96.83 (0.20) 91.79 (0.32)
Replay + Exemplars iCaRL (budget = 2000) - - 94.57 ( 0.11)
Table 5: Idem as Table 4, except on the permuted MNIST task protocol.
Approach Method Task-IL Domain-IL Class-IL
BaselinesNone – lower bound 81.79 ( 0.48) 78.51 (0.24) 17.26 (0.19)
Ofﬂine – upper bound 97.68 (0.01) 97.59 (0.01) 97.59 (0.02)
Task-speciﬁc XdG 91.40 ( 0.23) - -
RegularizationEWC 94.74 ( 0.05) 94.31 (0.11) 25.04 (0.50)
Online EWC 95.96 ( 0.06) 94.42 (0.13) 33.88 (0.49)
SI 94.75 ( 0.14) 95.33 (0.11) 29.31 (0.62)
ReplayLwF 69.84 ( 0.46) 72.64 (0.52) 22.64 (0.23)
DGR 92.52 ( 0.08) 95.09 (0.04) 92.19 (0.09)
DGR+distill 97.51 ( 0.01) 97.35 (0.02) 96.38 (0.03)
Replay + Exemplars iCaRL (budget = 2000) - - 94.85 ( 0.03)
and Class-IL scenarios. Somewhat strikingly, we found that in all scenarios, replaying images from
the current task (LwF; e.g., replaying ‘2’s and ‘3’s in order not to forget how to recognize ‘0’s and
‘1’s), prevented the forgetting of previous tasks better than any of the regularization-based methods.
We further note that in contrast to several recent reports [e.g., 3,10,11], we obtained competitive
performance of EWC (and Online EWC) on the task-IL scenario variant of split MNIST (i.e., ‘multi-
headed split MNIST’). Reason for this difference is that we explored a much wider hyperparameter
range; our selected values were several orders of magnitude larger than those typically considered
(see section D in the Appendix).1
For the permuted MNIST protocol, all methods except LwF performed well in both the Task-IL and
the Domain-IL scenario (Table 5). In the Class-IL, however, the regularization-based methods failed
again and only replay-based methods obtained good performance. The difference between the Task-IL
and Domain-IL scenarios was only small for this task protocol, but this might be because—except
in XdG—task identity information was only used in the output layer, while information about the
applied permutation would likely be more useful in the network’s lower layers. Conﬁrming this
hypothesis, we found that each method’s performance in the Task-IL scenario could be improved by
combining it with XdG (i.e., using task-identity in the hidden layers; see section B in the Appendix).
Finally, while LwF had some success with the split MNIST protocol, this method did not work
with the permuted MNIST protocol, presumably because now the inputs of the different tasks were
uncorrelated due to the random permutations.
1An explanation for these extreme hyperparameter values is that the individual tasks of the split MNIST
protocol (i.e., distinguishing between two digits) are relatively easy, making that after ﬁnishing training on each
task the gradients—and thus the Fisher Information on which EWC is based—are very small.
7
6 Discussion
Catastrophic forgetting is a major obstacle to the development of artiﬁcial intelligence applications
capable of true lifelong learning [ 27,28], and enabling neural networks to sequentially learn multiple
tasks has become a topic of intense research. Yet, despite its scope, this research ﬁeld is relatively
unstructured: even though the same datasets tend to be used, direct comparisons between published
methods are difﬁcult. We demonstrate that an important difference between currently used experi-
mental protocols is whether task identity is provided and—if it is not—whether it must be inferred.
These two distinctions led us to identify three scenarios for continual learning of varying difﬁculty. It
is hoped that these scenarios will help to provide structure to the continual learning ﬁeld and make
comparisons between studies easier.
For each scenario, we performed a comprehensive comparison of recently proposed methods. An
important conclusion is that for the class-incremental learning scenario (i.e., when task identity must
be inferred), currently only replay-based methods are capable of producing acceptable results. In
this scenario, even for relatively simple task protocols involving the classiﬁcation of MNIST-digits,
regularization-based methods such as EWC and SI completely fail. On the split MNIST task protocol,
regularization-based methods also struggle in the domain-incremental learning scenario (i.e., when
task identity does not need to be inferred but is also not provided). These results highlight that for the
more challenging, ethological-relevant scenarios where task identity is not provided, replay might be
an unavoidable tool.
It should be stressed that a limitation of the current study is that MNIST-images are relatively easy to
generate. It therefore remains an open question whether generative replay will still be so successful
for task protocols with more complicated input distributions. However, promising for generative
replay is that the capabilities of generative models are rapidly improving [e.g., 29,30,31]. Moreover,
the good performance of LwF (i.e., replaying inputs from the current task) on the split MNIST task
protocol suggests that even if the quality of replayed samples is not perfect, they could still be very
helpful. For a further discussion of the scalability of generative replay we refer to [ 10]. Finally,
as illustrated by iCaRL, an alternative / complement to replaying generated samples could be to
store examples from previous tasks and replay those (see section C in the Appendix for a further
discussion).
Acknowledgments
We thank Mengye Ren, Zhe Li and anonymous reviewers for comments on various parts of this
work. This research project has been supported by an IBRO-ISN Research Fellowship, by the
Lifelong Learning Machines (L2M) program of the Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) via contract number HR0011-18-2-0025 and by the Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior/Interior Business Center (DoI/IBC) contract
number D16PC00003. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The views
and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
representing the ofﬁcial policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of DARPA, IARPA,
DoI/IBC, or the U.S. Government.
References
[1]James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins,
Andrei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al.
Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of
sciences , page 201611835, 2017.
[2]Sylvestre-Alvise Rebufﬁ, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H Lampert. icarl:
Incremental classiﬁer and representation learning. In Proc. CVPR , 2017.
[3]Cuong V Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D Bui, and Richard E Turner. Variational continual
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10628 , 2017.
[4]Nicolas Y Masse, Gregory D Grant, and David J Freedman. Alleviating catastrophic forgetting
using context-dependent gating and synaptic stabilization. Proceedings of the national academy
of sciences , pages E10467–E10475, 2018.
8
[5]Ronald Kemker and Christopher Kanan. Fearnet: Brain-inspired model for incremental learning.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=SJ1Xmf-Rb .
[6]Yue Wu, Yinpeng Chen, Lijuan Wang, Yuancheng Ye, Zicheng Liu, Yandong Guo, Zhengyou
Zhang, and Yun Fu. Incremental classiﬁer learning with generative adversarial networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.00853 , 2018.
[7]Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic
intelligence. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages
3987–3995, 2017.
[8]Ronald Kemker, Angelina Abitino, Marc McClure, and Christopher Kanan. Measuring catas-
trophic forgetting in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02072 , 2017.
[9]Nitin Kamra, Umang Gupta, and Yan Liu. Deep generative dual memory network for continual
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10368 , 2017.
[10] Gido M van de Ven and Andreas S Tolias. Generative replay with feedback connections as a
general strategy for continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10635 , 2018.
[11] Yen-Chang Hsu, Yen-Cheng Liu, and Zsolt Kira. Re-evaluating continual learning scenarios: A
categorization and case for strong baselines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12488 , 2018.
[12] Chen Zeno, Itay Golan, Elad Hoffer, and Daniel Soudry. Task agnostic continual learning using
online variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10123v3 , 2019.
[13] Kibok Lee, Kimin Lee, Jinwoo Shin, and Honglak Lee. Incremental learning with unlabeled
data in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.12648 , 2019.
[14] Sebastian Farquhar and Yarin Gal. Towards robust evaluations of continual learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.09733 , 2018.
[15] Arslan Chaudhry, Puneet K Dokania, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip HS Torr. Riemannian
walk for incremental learning: Understanding forgetting and intransigence. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.10112 , 2018.
[16] Ian J Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Da Xiao, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An empirical
investigation of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6211 , 2013.
[17] Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Charles Blundell, Yori Zwols, David Ha, Andrei A Rusu,
Alexander Pritzel, and Daan Wierstra. Pathnet: Evolution channels gradient descent in super
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.08734 , 2017.
[18] Joan Serrà, Dídac Surís, Marius Miron, and Alexandros Karatzoglou. Overcoming catastrophic
forgetting with hard attention to the task. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01423 , 2018.
[19] Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2017.
[20] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015.
[21] Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep
generative replay. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 2994–3003,
2017.
[22] Ragav Venkatesan, Hemanth Venkateswara, Sethuraman Panchanathan, and Baoxin Li. A
strategy for an uncompromising incremental learner. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.00744 , 2017.
[23] Thomas Mensink, Jakob Verbeek, Florent Perronnin, and Gabriela Csurka. Metric learning for
large scale image classiﬁcation: Generalizing to new classes at near-zero cost. In Computer
Vision–ECCV 2012 , pages 488–501. Springer, 2012.
9
[24] Jonathan Schwarz, Jelena Luketina, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska,
Yee Whye Teh, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progress & compress: A scalable framework
for continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06370 , 2018.
[25] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[26] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013.
[27] Dharshan Kumaran, Demis Hassabis, and James L McClelland. What learning systems do
intelligent agents need? complementary learning systems theory updated. Trends in cognitive
sciences , 20(7):512–534, 2016.
[28] German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual
lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07569 , 2018.
[29] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil
Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pages 2672–2680, 2014.
[30] Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06759 , 2016.
[31] Danilo Jimenez Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing ﬂows.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.05770 , 2015.
[32] James Martens. New insights and perspectives on the natural gradient method. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.1193 , 2014.
[33] Ferenc Huszár. Note on the quadratic penalties in elastic weight consolidation. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences , 115(11):E2496–E2497, 2018.
[34] Carl Doersch. Tutorial on variational autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05908 , 2016.
10
A Additional experimental details
PyTorch-code to perform the experiments described in this report is available online: https://
github.com/GMvandeVen/continual-learning .
A.1 Loss functions
A.1.1 Classiﬁcation
The standard per-sample cross entropy loss function for an input xlabeled with a hard target yis
given by:
Lclassiﬁcation (x;y;) = logp(Y=yjx) (1)
wherepis the conditional probability distribution deﬁned by the neural network whose trainable
bias and weight parameters are collected in . It is important to note that in this report this probability
distribution is not always deﬁned over all output nodes of the network, but only over the “active
nodes”. This means that the normalization performed by the ﬁnal softmax layer only takes into
account these active nodes, and that learning is thus restricted to those nodes. For experiments
performed according to the Task-IL scenario, for which we use a “multi-headed” softmax layer,
always only the nodes of the task under consideration are active. Typically this is the current task, but
for replayed data it is the task that is (intended to be) replayed. For the Domain-IL scenario always
all nodes are active. For the Class-IL scenario, the nodes of all tasks seen so far are active, both when
training on current and on replayed data.
For the method DGR, there are also some subtle differences between the continual learning scenarios
when generating hard targets for the inputs to be replayed. With the Task-IL scenario, only the classes
of the task that is intended to be replayed can be predicted (in each iteration the available replays
are equally divided over the previous tasks). With the Domain-IL scenario always all classes can be
predicted. With the Class-IL scenario only classes from up to the previous task can be predicted.
A.1.2 Distillation
The methods LwF and DGR+distill use distillation loss for their replayed data. For this, each input x
to be replayed is labeled with a “soft target”, which is a vector containing a probability for each active
class. This target probability vector is obtained using a copy of the main model stored after ﬁnishing
training on the most recent task, and the training objective is to match the probabilities predicted by
the model being trained to these target probabilities (by minimizing the cross entropy between them).
Moreover, as is common for distillation, these two probability distributions that we want to match are
made softer by temporary raising the temperature Tof their models’ softmax layers.2This means
that before the softmax normalization is performed on the logits, these logits are ﬁrst divided by T.
For an inputxto be replayed during training of task K, the soft targets are given by the vector ~y
whosecthelement is given by:
~yc=pT
^(K 1)(Y=cjx) (2)
where ^(K 1)is the vector with parameter values at the end of training of task K 1andpT
is the
conditional probability distribution deﬁned by the neural network with parameters and with the
temperature of its softmax layer raised to T. The distillation loss function for an input xlabeled with
a soft target vector ~yis then given by:
Ldistillation (x;~y;) = T2NclassesX
c=1~yclogpT
(Y=cjx) (3)
where the scaling by T2is included to ensure that the relative contribution of this objective matches
that of a comparable objective with hard targets [20].
When generating soft targets for the inputs to be replayed, there are again subtle differences between
the three continual learning scenarios. With the Task-IL scenario, the soft target probability dis-
tribution is deﬁned only over the classes of the task intended to be replayed. With the Domain-IL
2The same temperature should be used for calculating the target probabilities and for calculating the
probabilities to be matched during training; but during testing the temperature should be set back to 1. A typical
value for this temperature is 2, which is the value used in this report.
11
scenario this distribution is always over all classes. With the Clase-IL scenario, the soft target
probability distribution is ﬁrst generated only over the classes from up to the previous task and then
zero probabilities are added for all classes in the current task.
A.2 Regularization terms
A.2.1 EWC
The regularization term of elastic weight consolidation [EWC; 1] consists of a quadratic penalty term
for each previously learned task, whereby each task’s term penalizes the parameters for how different
they are compared to their value directly after ﬁnishing training on that task. The strength of each
parameter’s penalty depends for every task on how important that parameter was estimated to be for
that task, with higher penalties for more important parameters. For EWC, a parameter’s importance
is estimated for each task by the parameter’s corresponding diagonal element of that task’s Fisher
Information matrix, evaluated at the optimal parameter values after ﬁnishing training on that task.
The EWC regularization term for task K > 1is given by:
L(K)
regularizationEWC() =K 1X
k=10
@1
2NparamsX
i=1F(k)
ii
i ^(k)
i21
A (4)
whereby ^(k)
iis theithelement of ^(k), which is the vector with parameter values at the end of training
of taskk, andF(k)
iiis theithdiagonal element of F(k), which is the Fisher Information matrix of task
kevaluated at ^(k). Following the deﬁnitions and notation in Martens [32], theithdiagonal element
ofF(k)is deﬁned as:
F(k)
ii=ExQ(k)
xEp(yjx)"logp(Y=yjx)
i2#
=^(k)(5)
wherebyQ(k)
xis the (theoretical) input distribution of task kandpis the conditional distribution
deﬁned by the neural network with parameters . Note that in Kirkpatrick et al. [1]it is not speciﬁed
exactly how these F(k)
iiare calculated (except that it is said to be “easy”); but we have been made
aware that they are calculated as the diagonal elements of the “true Fisher Information”:
F(k)
ii=1
jS(k)jX
x2S(k)0
@logp
Y= ^y(k)
xjx
i
=^(k)1
A2
(6)
wherebyS(k)is the training data of task kand^y(k)
x= argminylogp^(k)(Y=yjx), the label
predicted by the model with parameters ^(k)givenx.3The calculation of the Fisher Information
is time-consuming, especially if tasks have a lot of training data. In practice it might therefore
sometimes be beneﬁcial to trade accuracy for speed by using only a subset of a task’s training data for
this calculation (e.g., by introducing another hyperparameter NFisher that sets the maximum number
of samples to be used in equation 6).
A.2.2 Online EWC
A disadvantage of the original formulation of EWC is that the number of quadratic terms in its
regularization term grows linearly with the number of tasks. This is an important limitation, as
for a method to be applicable in a true lifelong learning setting its computational cost should not
increase with the number of tasks seen so far. It was pointed out by Huszár [33] that a slightly stricter
3An alternative way to calculate F(k)
iiwould be, instead of taking for each training input xonly the most
likely label predicted by model p^(k), to sample for each xmultiple labels from the entire conditional distribution
deﬁned by this model (i.e., to approximate the inner expectation of equation 5 for each training sample xwith
Monte Carlo sampling from p^(k)(jx)). Another option is to use the “empirical Fisher Information", by
replacing in equation 6 the predicted label ^y(k)
xby the observed label y. The results reported in Tables 4 and 5
do not depend much on the choice of how F(k)
iiis calculated.
12
adherence to the approximate Bayesian treatment of continual learning, which had been used as
motivation for EWC, actually results in only a single quadratic penalty term on the parameters that is
anchored at the optimal parameters after the most recent task and with the weight of the parameters’
penalties determined by a running sum of the previous tasks’ Fisher Information matrices. This
insight was adopted by Schwarz et al. [24], who proposed a modiﬁcation to EWC called online EWC .
The regularization term of online EWC when training on task K > 1is given by:
L(K)
regularizationoEWC=NparamsX
i=1~F(K 1)
ii
i ^(K 1)
i2
(7)
whereby ^(K 1)
i is the value of parameter iafter ﬁnishing training on task K 1and~F(K 1)
ii is a
running sum of the ithdiagonal elements of the Fisher Information matrices of the ﬁrst K 1tasks,
with a hyperparameter 1that governs a gradual decay of each previous task’s contribution. That
is:~F(k)
ii=~F(k 1)
ii +F(k)
ii, with ~F(1)
ii=F(1)
iiandF(k)
iiis theithdiagonal element of the Fisher
Information matrix of task kcalculated according to equation 6.
A.2.3 SI
Similar as for online EWC, the regularization term of synaptic intelligence [SI; 7] consists of only one
quadratic term that penalizes changes to parameters away from their values after ﬁnishing training on
the previous task, with the strength of each parameter’s penalty depending on how important that
parameter is thought to be for the tasks learned so far. To estimate parameters’ importance, for every
new taskka per-parameter contribution to the change of the loss is ﬁrst calculated for each parameter
ias follows:
!(k)
i=NitersX
t=1
i[t(k)] i[(t 1)(k)] Ltotal[t(k)]
i(8)
withNitersthe total number of iterations per task, i[t(k)]the value of the ithparameter after the tth
training iteration on task kandLtotal[t(k)]
ithe gradient of the loss with respect to the ithparameter
during thetthtraining iteration on task k. For every task, these per-parameter contributions are
normalized by the square of the total change of that parameter during training on that task plus a small
dampening term (set to 0.1, to bound the resulting normalized contributions when a parameter’s total
change goes to zero), after which they are summed over all tasks so far. The estimated importance of
parameterifor the ﬁrstK 1tasks is thus given by:

(K 1)
i =K 1X
k=1!(k)
i
(k)
i2
+(9)
with (k)
i=i[Niters(k)] i[0(k)], wherei[0(k)]indicates the value of parameter iright before
starting training on task k. (An alternative formulation is (k)
i=^(k)
i ^(k 1)
i , with ^(0)
ithe value
of parameter iit was initialized with and ^(k)
iits value after ﬁnishing training on task k.) The
regularization term of SI to be used during training on task Kis then given by:
L(K)
regularizationSI=NparamsX
i=1
(K 1)
i
i ^(K 1)
i2
(10)
A.3 Generative Model
The separate generative model that is used for DGR and DGR+distill is a variational autoencoder
(V AE; 26), of which both the encoder network qand the decoder network p are multi-layer
perceptrons with 2 hidden layers containing 400 (split MNIST) or 1000 (permuted MNIST) units
with ReLU non-linearity. The stochastic latent variable layer zhas 100 units and the prior over
them is the standard normal distribution. Following Kingma and Welling [26], the “latent variable
regularization term” of this V AE is given by:
Llatent(x;) =1
2100X
j=1
1 + log
(x)
j2
 (x)
j2 (x)
j2
(11)
13
whereby(x)
jand(x)
jare thejthelements of respectively (x)and(x), which are the outputs
of the encoder network qgiven inputx. Following Doersch [34], the output layer of the decoder
networkp has a sigmoid non-linearity and the “reconstruction term” is given by the binary cross
entropy between the original and decoded pixel values:
Lrecon(x;; ) =NpixelsX
p=1xplog (~xp) + (1 xp) log (1 ~xp) (12)
wherebyxpis the value of the pthpixel of the original input image xand~xpis the value of the pth
pixel of the decoded image ~x=p  
z(x)
withz(x)=(x)+(x), wherebyis sampled from
N(0;I100). The per-sample loss function for an input xis then given by [26]:
Lgenerative (x;; ) =Lrecon(x;; ) +Llatent(x;) (13)
Similar to the main model, the generative model is trained with replay generated by its own copy
stored after ﬁnishing training on the previous task.
A.4 iCaRL
A.4.1 Feature Extractor
Network Architecture For our implementation of iCaRL [ 2], we used a feature extractor with the
same architecture as the neural network used as classiﬁer with the other methods. The only difference
is that the softmax output layer was removed. We denote this feature extractor by  (:), with its
trainable parameters contained in the vector . These parameters were trained based on binary
classiﬁcation / distillation loss (see below). For this—during training only!—a sigmoid output layer
was appended to  . The resulting extended network outputs for any class c2f1;:::;N classes so farga
binary probability whether input xbelongs to it:
pc
(x) =1
1 +e wTc (x)(14)
with= (;w1;:::;wNclasses so far )a vector containing all iCaRL’s trainable parameters. Whenever a
new classcwas encountered, new parameters wcwere added to .
Training On each task, the parameters in were trained on an extended dataset containing the
current task’s training data as well as all stored data from previous tasks (see section A.4.2). When
training on task K, each inputxwith hard target yin this extended dataset is paired with a new
target-vector ywhosejthelement is given by:
yc=(
pc
^(K 1)(x)if classcin task 1;:::;K 1
y=c if classcin taskK(15)
whereby ^(K 1)is the vector with parameter values at the end of training of task K 1. The per-
sample loss function for an input xlabeled with such an “old-task-soft-target / new-task-hard-target"
vector yis then given by:
LiCaRL(x;y;) = Nclasses so farX
c=1[yclogpc
(x) + (1 yc) log (1 pc
(x))] (16)
A.4.2 Selection of Stored Data
The assumption under which iCaRL operates is that up to Bdata-points (referred to as ‘exemplars’)
are allowed to be stored in memory. The available memory budget is evenly distributed over the
classes seen so far, resulting in m=j
B
Nclasses so fark
stored exemplars per class. After training on a task
is ﬁnished, the selection of data stored in memory is updated as follows:
14
Create exemplar-sets for new classes For each new class c, iterativelymexemplars are selected
based on their extracted feature vectors according to a procedure referred to as ‘herding’. In each
iteration, a new example from class cis selected such that the average feature vector over all selected
examples is as close as possible to the average feature vector over all available examples of class c. Let
Xc=fx1;:::;xNcgbe the set of all available examples of class cand letc=1
NcP
x2Xc (x)
be the average feature vector over set Xc. Thenthexemplar (for n= 1;:::;m ) to be selected for class
cis then given by:
pc
n= argmin
x2Xcc 1
n0
@ (x) +n 1X
j=1 (pc
j)1
A(17)
This results in ordered exemplar-sets Pc=fpc
1;:::;pc
mgfor each new class c.
Reduce exemplar-sets for old classes If the existing exemplar-sets for the old classes contain
more thanmexemplars each, for each old class the last selected exemplars are discarded until only
mexemplars per class are left.
A.4.3 Nearest-Class-Mean Classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation by iCaRL is performed according to a nearest-class-mean rule in feature space based
on the stored exemplars. For this, let c=1
jPcjP
p2Pc (p)forc= 1;:::;N classes so far . The label
ypredicted for a new input xis then given by:
y= argmin
c=1;:::;N classes so fark (x) ck (18)
B Using Task Identity in Hidden Layers
For the permuted MNIST protocol, there were only small differences in Table 5 between the results
of the Task-IL and Domain-IL scenario. This suggests that for this protocol, it is actually not so
important whether task identity information is available at test time. However, in the main text it
was hypothesized that this was the case because for most of the methods—only exception being
XdG—task identity was only used in the network’s output layer, while information about which
permutation was applied is likely more useful in the lower layers. To test this, we performed all
methods again on the Task-IL scenario of the permuted MNIST protocol, this time instead using
task identity information in the network’s hidden layers by combining each method with XdG. This
signiﬁcantly increased the performance of every method (Table B.1), thereby demonstrating that also
for the permuted MNIST protocol, the Task-IL scenario is indeed easier than the Domain-IL scenario.
Table B.1: Comparing two ways of using task identity information in the Task-IL scenario of the
permuted MNIST task protocol. In the ﬁrst column, each method uses a separate output layer for
each task (i.e., multi-headed output layer; same as in Table 5). In the second column, each method is
instead combined with XdG.
Method+ task-ID in + task-ID in
output layer hidden layers
None 81.79 ( 0.48) 90.41 (0.32)
EWC 94.74 ( 0.05) 96.94 (0.02)
Online EWC 95.96 ( 0.06) 96.89 (0.03)
SI 94.75 ( 0.14) 96.53 (0.04)
LwF 69.84 ( 0.46) 84.21 (0.48)
DGR 92.52 ( 0.08) 95.31 (0.04)
DGR+distill 97.51 ( 0.01) 97.67 (0.01)
15
C Replay of Stored Data
As an alternative to generative replay, when data from previous tasks can be stored, it is possible to
instead replay that data during training on new tasks. Another way in which stored data could be used
is during execution: for example, as in iCaRL, instead of using the softmax classiﬁer, classiﬁcation
can be done using a nearest-class-mean rule in feature space with class means calculated based on
the stored data. Stored data can also be used during both training and execution. We evaluated the
performance of these different variants of exact replay as a function of the total number of examples
allowed to be stored in memory (Figure C.1), whereby the data to be stored was always selected
using the same ‘herding’-algorithm as used in iCaRL (see section A.4.2).
Figure C.1: Average test accuracy (over all tasks) of different ways of using stored data on split
MNIST (A) and on permuted MNIST (B) as a function of the total number of examples allowed to be
stored in memory. For comparison, the accuracy of the other methods is indicated on the left or as
horizontal lines. Displayed are the means over 20 repetitions, shaded areas are 1 SEM.
In the Class-IL scenario, we found that for both task protocols even storing one example per class
was enough for any of the exact replay methods to outperform all regularization-based methods.
However, to match the performance of generative replay, it was required to store substantially more
data. In particular, for permuted MNIST, even with 50,000 stored examples exact replay variants
were consistently outperformed by DGR+distill.
D Hyperparameters
Several of the in this report compared continual learning methods have one or more hyperparameters.
The typical way of setting the value of hyperparameters is by training models on the training set
for a range of hyperparameter-values, and selecting those that result in the best performance on a
separate validation set. This strategy has been adapted to the continual learning setting as training
models on the full protocol with different hyperparameter-values using only every task’s training
data, and comparing their overall performances using separate validation sets (or sometimes the test
sets) for each task [e.g., see 16,1,8,24]. However, here we would like to stress that this means that
these hyperparameters are set (or learned) based on an evaluation using data from all tasks, which
violates the continual learning principle of only being allowed to visit each task once and in sequence.
16
Figure D.1: Grid searches for the split MNIST task protocol. Shown are the average test set accuracies
(over all 5 tasks) for the (combination of) hyperparameter-values tested for each method.
Figure D.2: Grid searches for the permuted MNIST task protocol. Shown are the average test set
accuracies (over all 10 tasks) for the (combination of) hyperparameter-values tested for each method.
17
Although it is tempting to think that it is acceptable to relax this principle for tasks’ validation data,
we argue here that it is not. A clear example of how using each task’s validation data continuously
throughout an incremental training protocol can lead to an in our opinion unfair advantage is provided
by Wu et al. [6], in which after ﬁnishing training on each task a “bias-removal parameter” is set that
optimizes performance on the validation sets of all tasks seen so far (see their section 3.3). Although
the hyperparameters of the methods compared here are much less inﬂuential than those in the above
report, we believe that it is important to realize this issue associated with traditional grid searches in a
continual learning setting and that at a minimum inﬂuential hyperparameters should be avoided in
methods for continual learning.
Nevertheless, to give the competing methods of generative replay the best possible chance—and to
explore how inﬂuential their hyperparameters are—we do perform grid searches to set the values
of their hyperparameters (see Figures D.1 and D.2). Given the issue discussed above we do not see
much value in using validation sets for this, and we evaluate the performances of all hyperparameter(-
combination)s using the tasks’ test sets. For this grid search each experiment is run once, after which
20 new runs are executed using the selected hyperparameter-values to obtain the results in Tables 4
and 5 in the main text.
18