Title: Measuring the Reliability of Hate Speech Annotations: The Case of the European Refugee Crisis

Measuring the Reliability of Hate Speech Annotations:
The Case of the European Refugee Crisis
Bj¨orn Ross Michael Rist Guillermo Carbonell
Benjamin Cabrera Nils Kurowsky Michael Wojatzki
Research Training Group ”User-Centred Social Media”
Department of Computer Science and Applied Cognitive Science
University of Duisburg-Essen
firstname.lastname@uni-due.de
Abstract
Some users of social media are spreading
racist, sexist, and otherwise hateful con-
tent. For the purpose of training a hate
speech detection system, the reliability of
the annotations is crucial, but there is no
universally agreed-upon deﬁnition. We
collected potentially hateful messages and
asked two groups of internet users to de-
termine whether they were hate speech or
not, whether they should be banned or not
and to rate their degree of offensiveness.
One of the groups was shown a deﬁnition
prior to completing the survey. We aimed
to assess whether hate speech can be an-
notated reliably, and the extent to which
existing deﬁnitions are in accordance with
subjective ratings. Our results indicate that
showing users a deﬁnition caused them to
partially align their own opinion with the
deﬁnition but did not improve reliability,
which was very low overall. We conclude
that the presence of hate speech should per-
haps not be considered a binary yes-or-no
decision, and raters need more detailed in-
structions for the annotation.
1 Introduction
Social media are sometimes used to disseminate
hateful messages. In Europe, the current surge in
hate speech has been linked to the ongoing refugee
crisis. Lawmakers and social media sites are in-
creasingly aware of the problem and are developing
approaches to deal with it, for example promising
to remove illegal messages within 24 hours after
they are reported (Titcomb, 2016).
This raises the question of how hate speech can
be detected automatically. Such an automatic detec-
tion method could be used to scan the large amount
of text generated on the internet for hateful contentand report it to the relevant authorities. It would
also make it easier for researchers to examine the
diffusion of hateful content through social media
on a large scale.
From a natural language processing perspective,
hate speech detection can be considered a classiﬁca-
tion task: given an utterance, determine whether or
not it contains hate speech. Training a classiﬁer re-
quires a large amount of data that is unambiguously
hate speech. This data is typically obtained by man-
ually annotating a set of texts based on whether a
certain element contains hate speech.
The reliability of the human annotations is essen-
tial, both to ensure that the algorithm can accurately
learn the characteristics of hate speech, and as an
upper bound on the expected performance (Warner
and Hirschberg, 2012; Waseem and Hovy, 2016).
As a preliminary step, six annotators rated 469
tweets. We found that agreement was very low (see
Section 3). We then carried out group discussions
to ﬁnd possible reasons. They revealed that there
is considerable ambiguity in existing deﬁnitions. A
given statement may be considered hate speech or
not depending on someone’s cultural background
and personal sensibilities. The wording of the ques-
tion may also play a role.
We decided to investigate the issue of reliability
further by conducting a more comprehensive study
across a large number of annotators, which we
present in this paper.
Our contribution in this paper is threefold:
To the best of our knowledge, this paper
presents the ﬁrst attempt at compiling a Ger-
man hate speech corpus for the refugee crisis.1
We provide an estimate of the reliability of
hate speech annotations.
We investigate how the reliability of the anno-
tations is affected by the exact question asked.
1Available at https://github.com/UCSM-DUE/
IWG_hatespeech_publicarXiv:1701.08118v1  [cs.CL]  27 Jan 2017
2 Hate Speech
For the purpose of building a classiﬁer, Warner
and Hirschberg (2012) deﬁne hate speech as “abu-
sive speech targeting speciﬁc group characteristics,
such as ethnic origin, religion, gender, or sexual
orientation”. More recent approaches rely on lists
of guidelines such as a tweet being hate speech if
it “uses a sexist or racial slur” (Waseem and Hovy,
2016). These approaches are similar in that they
leave plenty of room for personal interpretation,
since there may be differences in what is consid-
ered offensive. For instance, while the utterance
“the refugees will live off our money” is clearly gen-
eralising and maybe unfair, it is unclear if this is
already hate speech. More precise deﬁnitions from
law are speciﬁc to certain jurisdictions and there-
fore do not capture all forms of offensive, hateful
speech, see e.g. Matsuda (1993). In practice, so-
cial media services are using their own deﬁnitions
which have been subject to adjustments over the
years (Jeong, 2016). As of June 2016, Twitter bans
hateful conduct2.
With the rise in popularity of social media, the
presence of hate speech has grown on the internet.
Posting a tweet takes little more than a working
internet connection but may be seen by users all
over the world.
Along with the presence of hate speech, its real-
life consequences are also growing. It can be a
precursor and incentive for hate crimes, and it can
be so severe that it can even be a health issue (Bur-
nap and Williams, 2014). It is also known that
hate speech does not only mirror existing opin-
ions in the reader but can also induce new negative
feelings towards its targets (Martin et al., 2013).
Hate speech has recently gained some interest as
a research topic on the one hand – e.g. (Djuric
et al., 2014; Burnap and Williams, 2014; Silva et
al., 2016) – but also as a problem to deal with in
politics such as the No Hate Speech Movement by
the Council of Europe.
The current refugee crisis has made it evident
that governments, organisations and the public
share an interest in controlling hate speech in social
media. However, there seems to be little consensus
on what hate speech actually is.
2“You may not promote violence against or directly attack
or threaten other people on the basis of race, ethnicity, national
origin, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, religious
afﬁliation, age, disability, or disease. We also do not allow
accounts whose primary purpose is inciting harm towards
others on the basis of these categories.”, The Twitter Rules3 Compiling A Hate Speech Corpus
As previously mentioned, there is no German hate
speech corpus available for our needs, especially
not for the very recent topic of the refugee crisis
in Europe. We therefore had to compile our own
corpus. We used Twitter as a source as it offers
recent comments on current events. In our study
we only considered the textual content of tweets
that contain certain keywords, ignoring those that
contain pictures or links. This section provides a
detailed description of the approach we used to
select the tweets and subsequently annotate them.
To ﬁnd a large amount of hate speech on the
refugee crisis, we used 10 hashtags3that can be
used in an insulting or offensive way. Using
these hashtags we gathered 13 766 tweets in total,
roughly dating from February to March 2016. How-
ever, these tweets contained a lot of non-textual
content which we ﬁltered out automatically by re-
moving tweets consisting solely of links or im-
ages. We also only considered original tweets, as
retweets or replies to other tweets might only be
clearly understandable when reading both tweets
together. In addition, we removed duplicates and
near-duplicates by discarding tweets that had a nor-
malised Levenshtein edit distance smaller than .85
to an aforementioned tweet. A ﬁrst inspection of
the remaining tweets indicated that not all search
terms were equally suited for our needs. The search
term #Pack (vermin or lowlife) found a potentially
large amount of hate speech not directly linked to
the refugee crisis. It was therefore discarded. As
a last step, the remaining tweets were manually
read to eliminate those which were difﬁcult to un-
derstand or incomprehensible. After these ﬁltering
steps, our corpus consists of 541 tweets, none of
which are duplicates, contain links or pictures, or
are retweets or replies.
As a ﬁrst measurement of the frequency of hate
speech in our corpus, we personally annotated them
based on our previous expertise. The 541 tweets
were split into six parts and each part was annotated
by two out of six annotators in order to determine
if hate speech was present or not. The annotators
were rotated so that each pair of annotators only
evaluated one part. Additionally the offensiveness
of a tweet was rated on a 6-point Likert scale, the
same scale used later in the study.
3#Pack ,#Aslyanten ,#WehrDich ,#Krimmigranten ,
#Rapefugees ,#Islamfaschisten ,#RefugeesNotWelcome ,
#Islamisierung ,#AsylantenInvasion ,#Scharia
Even among researchers familiar with the deﬁni-
tions outlined above, there was still a low level of
agreement (Krippendorff’s a=:38). This supports
our claim that a clearer deﬁnition is necessary in
order to be able to train a reliable classiﬁer. The
low reliability could of course be explained by vary-
ing personal attitudes or backgrounds, but clearly
needs more consideration.
4 Methods
In order to assess the reliability of the hate speech
deﬁnitions on social media more comprehensively,
we developed two online surveys in a between-
subjects design. They were completed by 56 par-
ticipants in total (see Table 1). The main goal was
to examine the extent to which non-experts agree
upon their understanding of hate speech given a
diversity of social media content. We used the
Twitter deﬁnition of hateful conduct in the ﬁrst sur-
vey. This deﬁnition was presented at the beginning,
and again above every tweet. The second survey
did not contain any deﬁnition. Participants were
randomly assigned one of the two surveys.
The surveys consisted of 20 tweets presented in
a random order. For each tweet, each participant
was asked three questions. Depending on the sur-
vey, participants were asked (1)to answer (yes/no)
if they considered the tweet hate speech, either
based on the deﬁnition or based on their personal
opinion. Afterwards they were asked (2)to answer
(yes/no) if the tweet should be banned from Twitter.
Participants were ﬁnally asked (3)to answer how
offensive they thought the tweet was on a 6-point
Likert scale from 1 (Not offensive at all) to 6 (Very
offensive). If they answered 4 or higher, the par-
ticipants had the option to state which particular
words they found offensive.
After the annotation of the 20 tweets, partici-
pants were asked to voluntarily answer an open
question regarding the deﬁnition of hate speech.
In the survey with the deﬁnition, they were asked
if the deﬁnition of Twitter was sufﬁcient. In the
survey without the deﬁnition, the participants were
asked to suggest a deﬁnition themselves. Finally,
sociodemographic data were collected, including
age, gender and more speciﬁc information regard-
ing the participant’s political orientation, migration
background, and personal position regarding the
refugee situation in Europe.
The surveys were approved by the ethical com-
mittee of the Department of Computer Science andApplied Cognitive Science of the Faculty of Engi-
neering at the University of Duisburg-Essen.
5 Preliminary Results and Discussion
Since the surveys were completed by 56 partici-
pants, they resulted in 1120 annotations. Table 1
shows some summary statistics.
Def. No def. p r
Participants 25 31
Age (mean) 33.3 30.5
Gender (% female) 43.5 58.6
Hate Speech (% yes) 32.6 40.3 .26 .15
Ban (% yes) 32.6 17.6 .01 -.32
Offensive (mean) 3.49 3.42 .55 -.08
Table 1: Summary statistics with p values and ef-
fect size estimates from WMW tests. Not all par-
ticipants chose to report their age or gender.
To assess whether the deﬁnition had any effect,
we calculated, for each participant, the percentage
of tweets they considered hate speech or suggested
to ban and their mean offensiveness rating. This
allowed us to compare the two samples for each of
the three questions. Preliminary Shapiro-Wilk tests
indicated that some of the data were not normally
distributed. We therefore used the Wilcoxon-Mann-
Whitney (WMW) test to compare the three pairs of
series. The results are reported in Table 1.
Participants who were shown the deﬁnition were
more likely to suggest to ban the tweet. In fact,
participants in group one very rarely gave differ-
ent answers to questions one and two (18 of 500
instances or 3.6%). This suggests that participants
in that group aligned their own opinion with the
deﬁnition.
We chose Krippendorff’s ato assess reliabil-
ity, a measure from content analysis, where human
coders are required to be interchangeable. There-
fore, it measures agreement instead of association,
which leaves no room for the individual predilec-
tions of coders. It can be applied to any number
of coders and to interval as well as nominal data.
(Krippendorff, 2004)
This allowed us to compare agreement between
both groups for all three questions. Figure 1 visu-
alises the results. Overall, agreement was very low,
ranging from a=:18to:29. In contrast, for the
purpose of content analysis, Krippendorff recom-
mends a minimum of a=:80, or a minimum of
:66for applications where some uncertainty is un-
0.00.10.20.3
1 2 3
QuestionAlphaGroup
No definition
DefinitionFigure 1: Reliability (Krippendorff’s a) for the
different groups and questions
problematic (Krippendorff, 2004). Reliability did
not consistently increase when participants were
shown a deﬁnition.
To measure the extent to which the annotations
using the Twitter deﬁnition (question one in group
one) were in accordance with participants’ opinions
(question one in group two), we calculated, for each
tweet, the percentage of participants in each group
who considered it hate speech, and then calculated
Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient. The two series
correlate strongly ( r=:895;p< :0001 ), indicating
that they measure the same underlying construct.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper describes the creation of our hate speech
corpus and offers ﬁrst insights into the low agree-
ment among users when it comes to identifying
hateful messages. Our results imply that hate
speech is a vague concept that requires signiﬁcantly
better deﬁnitions and guidelines in order to be anno-
tated reliably. Based on the present ﬁndings, we are
planning to develop a new coding scheme which in-
cludes clear-cut criteria that let people distinguish
hate speech from other content.
Researchers who are building a hate speech de-
tection system might want to collect multiple labels
for each tweet and average the results. Of course
this approach does not make the original data any
more reliable (Krippendorff, 2004). Yet, collecting
the opinions of more users gives a more detailed
picture of objective (or intersubjective) hatefulness.
For the same reason, researchers might want to con-
sider hate speech detection a regression problem,
predicting, for example, the degree of hatefulness
of a message, instead of a binary yes-or-no classiﬁ-
cation task.In the future, ﬁnding the characteristics that
make users consider content hateful will be use-
ful for building a model that automatically detects
hate speech and users who spread hateful content,
and for determining what makes users disseminate
hateful content.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under grant No.
GRK 2167, Research Training Group ”User-
Centred Social Media”.
References
Peter Burnap and Matthew Leighton Williams. 2014.
Hate Speech, Machine Classiﬁcation and Statistical
Modelling of Information Flows on Twitter: Inter-
pretation and Communication for Policy Decision
Making. In Proceedings of IPP 2014 , pages 1–18.
Nemanja Djuric, Robin Morris Jing Zhou, Mihajlo Gr-
bovic, Vladan Radosavljevic, and Narayan Bhamidi-
pati. 2014. Hate Speech Detection with Comment
Embeddings. In ICML 2014 , volume 32, pages
1188–1196.
Sarah Jeong. 2016. The History of Twitter’s Rules.
VICE Motherboard .
Klaus Krippendorff. 2004. Reliability in Content Anal-
ysis: Some Common Misconceptions and Recom-
mendations. HCR , 30(3):411–433.
Ryan C Martin, Kelsey Ryan Coyier, Leah M VanSis-
tine, and Kelly L Schroeder. 2013. Anger on the In-
ternet: the Perceived Value of Rant-Sites. Cyberpsy-
chology, behavior and social networking , 16(2):119–
22.
Mari J Matsuda. 1993. Words that Wound - Criti-
cal Race Theory, Assaultive Speech, and the First
Amendment . Westview Press, New York.
Leandro Silva, Mainack Mondal, Denzil Correa,
Fabr´ıcio Benevenuto, and Ingmar Weber. 2016. An-
alyzing the Targets of Hate in Online Social Media.
InProceedings of ICWSM 2016 , pages 687–90.
James Titcomb. 2016. Facebook and Twitter promise
to crack down on internet hate speech. The Tele-
graph .
William Warner and Julia Hirschberg. 2012. Detecting
Hate Speech on the World Wide Web. In Proceed-
ings of LSM 2012 , pages 19–26. ACL.
Zeerak Waseem and Dirk Hovy. 2016. Hateful Sym-
bols or Hateful People? Predictive Features for Hate
Speech Detection on Twitter. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT , pages 88–93.