Title: One Epoch Is All You Need

ONEEPOCH ISALLYOUNEED
Aran Komatsuzaki
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
akomatsuzaki3@gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
In unsupervised learning, collecting more data is not always a costly process un-
like the training. For example, it is not hard to enlarge the 40GB WebText used for
training GPT-2 by modifying its sampling methodology considering how many
webpages there are in the Internet. On the other hand, given that training on
this dataset already costs tens of thousands of dollars, training on a larger dataset
naively is not cost-wise feasible. In this paper, we suggest to train on a larger
dataset for only one epoch unlike the current practice, in which the unsupervised
models are trained for from tens to hundreds of epochs. Furthermore, we suggest
to adjust the model size and the number of iterations to be performed appropri-
ately. We show that the performance of Transformer language model becomes
dramatically improved in this way, especially if the original number of epochs is
greater. For example, by replacing the training for 10 epochs with the one epoch
training, this translates to 1.9-3.3x speedup in wall-clock time in our settings and
more if the original number of epochs is greater. Under one epoch training, no
overﬁtting occurs, and regularization method does nothing but slows down the
training. Also, the curve of test loss over iterations follows power-law exten-
sively. We compare the wall-clock time of the training of models with different
parameter budget under one epoch training, and we show that size/iteration ad-
justment based on our proposed heuristics leads to 1-2.7x speedup in our cases.
With the two methods combined, we achieve 3.3-5.1x speedup. Finally, we spec-
ulate various implications of one epoch training and size/iteration adjustment. In
particular, based on our analysis we believe that we can reduce the cost to train
the state-of-the-art models as BERT and GPT-2 dramatically, maybe even by the
factor of 10.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Recently, unsupervised models have been growing rapidly and becoming more promising than previ-
ously expected. Notable examples include GPT-2, BERT and Sparse Transformer. The performance
of these models can be scaled up stably if they are given more parameters and more training data.
However, there is still a visible gap between their performance, especially that of generative models,
and that of human. From the current trend, it seems that the gap can be ﬁlled up if we can keep scal-
ing up and developing architectures for better long-range coherence such as Transformer-XL (Dai
et al., 2019) and Sparse Transformer (Child et al., 2019). Since the training of the best generative
models already costs tens of thousands of dollars, naively scaling up is not a practical option.
In fact, there is one obvious feature of the currently dominant practice in machine learning that can
be modiﬁed for signiﬁcant performance gain. This is to train for multiple epochs. While multi-
epoch training is reasonable in data-scarce settings such as supervised classiﬁcation, this turns out
to be inefﬁcient for data-abundant unsupervised learning according to our results. This may be a
trivial observation, but many recent papers have used multi-epoch training as shown in Table 1.
While many papers do not report the number of epochs, it is reasonable to assume that the number is
between 10 and 200. Note that GPT, BERT and GPT-2 were trained on an original dataset created by
their authors. Hence, they could have increased the dataset size and reduced the number of epochs
for better performance. On the other hand, many other papers have trained their model on a standard
1arXiv:1906.06669v1  [cs.LG]  16 Jun 2019
Table 1: The number of epochs used for the training.
Model Epochs
GPT (Radford et al., 2018) 100
SPN (Menick & Kalchbrenner, 2018) Not reported
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) 40
Mesh Transformer (Shazeer et al., 2018) 10
Transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019) Not reported
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) Not reported (20 or 100)
Sparse Transformer (Child et al., 2019) 70 - 120
dataset for many epochs to make the comparison with the previous state-of-the-art fair. Also, there
are many papers that do not report the number of epochs used for the training. Since the total
computational resources spent on the training is proportional to not only the number of parameters
but also the number of epochs, the current practice should be reconsidered. For example, we need
to create larger standard datasets, and the models have to be trained for only one epoch for a fair
comparison.
2 R ELATED WORKS
While we are not aware of any work that investigates training for one epoch with enlarged dataset,
there are many works that suggest the training on larger dataset (with a large number of epochs)
to improve the performance. Notably, the result of GPT (Radford et al., 2018), BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018) and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) implies that the training on a large dataset leads to a
signiﬁcant improvement in performance.
Some works have analyzed the relationship between the performance and the dataset size (Sun
et al., 2017; Hestness et al., 2017). Our work is most closely related to Hestness et al. (2017),
which showed that by training a language model on the subsets of 1 Billion Word Language Model
Benchmark (LM1B) (Chelba et al., 2013) of the varying size the performance and the dataset size
follow a robust power law given a sufﬁcient parameter budget. This comparison is more precise than
the aforementioned work. The difference from our work is that as the dataset size increases, they
also let the model to consume more computational resources by increasing the parameter budget
and ﬁxing the number of epochs. Also, they do not investigate the trade-off between the parameter
budget and the number of iterations unlike our work. This means that the performance improvement
promised by their result can be achieved only if computational resources are increased. In our work,
we achieve to improve the performance without increasing the computational resources.
One of the experiments of Popel & Bojar (2018) shows that larger neural machine translation (NMT)
dataset results in higher BLEU with the same parameter budget and the same number of iterations,
i.e., with smaller number of epochs. Since it is generally not easy to enlarge a NMT dataset, the
training with a small number of epochs was not investigated in the paper.
3 M ETHODS
3.1 O NEEPOCH TRAINING AND SIZE/ITERATION ADJUSTMENT
3.1.1 T OSEEPERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT OVER CONVENTIONAL SETTING
First, we describe one epoch training conversion procedure, which converts a conventional multi-
epoch training into a more efﬁcient one epoch training.
1. The dataset size is increased (e.g. by sampling from Internet a la WebText), so that, while
training for the same number of iterations as before, the same sample is never reused.
2. Any regularization method is eliminated.
2
This process substantially improves the performance with the same computation cost unless the
model size is much smaller compared with the dataset size, in which case the improvement is less.
Then, in order to further improve the performance without increasing the computation cost, we
adjust the model size and the number of iterations to be performed while keeping their product con-
stant. We ﬁnd that, if the ratio of the number of tokens in the dataset over the number of parameters
of the model is closer to 5, this is likely to give the optimal performance under one epoch training
given the cost constraint. We denote the (initial) number of parameters by P(orP0) and the (initial)
number of tokens to be processed by T(orT0). Note that T=cI, where cis the number of tokens
per minibatch and Iis the number of iterations.
3. We set PandTaccording to some heuristics. For example, we can perform this by setting
the ratio T=P as close to 5 as possible while keeping their product constant, or equivalently
by solving the following:
arg min
P;Tjlog(5) log(T=P)j subject to PT=P0T0:
In practice, the range of Phas only a small number of elements, since more choices do not usually
result in a signiﬁcant speedup. Therefore, ﬁnding PandTis quite simple.
3.1.2 H OW TO USETHEM IN PRACTICE
The above operations are useful to see performance improvement with one epoch training and model
size adjustment over the original multi-epoch setting. In practice, one is more interested in how to
use these techniques in practice, rather than starting from a given multi-epoch training prototype.
From our argument so far, this is quite simple to do.
1. Choose the number of iterations I.
Note that the total computation cost scales up quadratically with respect to I, since the optimal
model size scales up linearly with respect to I. From this and the available computation budget, one
can choose the value of I. The optimal model size is then chosen as in the above method. Let us
recall that we have T=cI. We use the same notations as before.
2. We set Paccording to some heuristics. For example, we can perform this by setting the
ratioT=P as close to 5 as possible while keeping their product constant, or equivalently by
solving the following:
arg min
Pjlog(5) log(T=P)j:
3. The model with size Pis trained for Iiterations for one epoch without any regularization
method.
3.2 J USTIFICATIONS FOR ONEEPOCH TRAINING
The justiﬁcations are quite intuitive. First, note that one epoch training substantially improves the
diversity of the samples processed by the model over the course of training. Training for Eepochs
is roughly equivalent to training on a shufﬂed dataset consisting of Ecopies of the original dataset
for one epoch. This means that the diversity of the original dataset is Etimes less than that of the
one epoch training. Greater dataset size also implies greater diversity, and both of these are known
to improve the performance (Hestness et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019). For example, WebText led
to a better generation quality than LM1B not only due to the greater dataset size and larger context
size but also due to the diversity of the dataset.
Also, under one epoch training, sampling from the training data distribution is practically identical
to sampling from the underlying data manifold (and therefore from that of the test dataset). This is
unlike the multi-epoch training, since sampling each sample again cannot occur when one samples
from the data manifold, whose cardinality is practically inﬁnite. This sampling discrepancy is a
primary cause of overﬁtting, which is a well-known fact, and the lack of overﬁtting observed in
one epoch training supports this. Overﬁtting is usually exacerbated as the number of iterations (and
hence the number of epochs) increases. This leads to better speedup with one epoch training when
3
the number of epochs of the original multi-epoch training is larger. Finally, note that averaging the
train loss per minibatch measured on the past nminibatches is approximately equal to the test loss
ifnis small enough. Hence, validation with test/validation dataset is not crucial.
4 E XPERIMENTS
Unless speciﬁed otherwise, the hyperparameters are as described here. We train base Transformer
decoder (Vaswani et al., 2017) with some modiﬁcations (as described below) for language model.
The dataset used is 1 Billion Word Language Model Benchmark (LM1B). We do not use any reg-
ularization method unless speciﬁed otherwise. Whenever the number of parameters is given below,
it contains the number of parameters of softmax and the embedding. As in Devlin et al. (2018);
Radford et al. (2019), we have dff= 4dmodel ,dq=dk=dv=dmodel andh=dmodel
64, where h
denotes the number of attention heads. Whenever we use the symbol dbelow, it stands for dmodel .
More details on the dataset and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix.
We are going to use the subsets of LM1B with varying size as in Hestness et al. (2017). Note
that the test loss achieved in our experiments are inferior to the models of Hestness et al. (2017)
and the state-of-the-art models for at least one of the following reasons: (1) the number of trained
iterations and/or the model size is signiﬁcantly smaller in our case, and (2) the vocabulary size was
set 10,000 in Hestness et al. (2017) to save the computation (unlike about 800,000 in the most papers,
including ours), which means their loss values are signiﬁcantly smaller than what they would be if
the vocabulary size was the same as ours.
This experiment veriﬁes that the performance of a language model is improved by the one epoch
training, and regularization harms the training under the one epoch training, i.e., if no sample is
reused in the training. We denote ”training with one epoch training” by S, ”training for multiple
epochs” by Mand ”using dropout” by D. For example, if a model is trained with single epoch
training and p= 0:1, we denote it by SD. We train the Transformer for the four cases: S,M,SD
andMD .
We set dmodel = 512 and train for 65,000 iterations. The number of parameters of the model is
45M. We also set p= 0:1for the cases in which dropout is used, unless speciﬁed otherwise. The
dataset size is 45M tokens (processed in 6,500 iterations) for the multi-epoch case and 450M tokens
for the single epoch case. Hence, 10 epochs are performed in total for the former case. This choice
of dataset size is due to the popular custom of training a language model whose size is close to the
number of tokens of the dataset. The result is shown in the top left ﬁgure of Fig. 1.
The other cases in the ﬁgure are provided to demonstrate how the magnitude of speedup differs
depending on whether the model is more overparametrized or underparametrized. For example, the
Right case has a smaller model size (i.e. more underparametrized). Likewise, the Bottom case is
more overparametrized. The speedup (1.9x) of Right is smaller than the speedup (3.3x) of Left and
Bottom. Thus, the speedup is smaller if the model is more underparametrized, which is expected.
For the Right case and the Bottom case, only the best-performing dropout probability is shown (e.g.
p= 0for the Right case and p= 0:1for the Bottom case). In any case, the model performs worse
ifp >0:1.
4.1 ONE EPOCH TRAINING
Here, the speedup is calculated as follows. First, we compute the number of iterations for Mor
MD to achieve the best loss. Also, we compute the number of iterations for Sto achieve the best
loss achieved by MandMD . The speedup is deﬁned to be the ratio of the former quantity over the
latter. For the case of the left ﬁgure of Fig. 1, the former is 65,000, whereas the latter is 20,000.
Thus, the speedup is65000
200003:3times. In the table, ” E= 10 ” refers to the speedup for the ﬁrst
10 epochs are trained, whereas ” E= 5” refers to the speedup for the ﬁrst 5 epochs are trained. The
speedup for the former case is just as explained above, and the speedup for the latter case can be
calculated likewise by ignoring the data on the plot of Fig. 1 after the ﬁrst 5 epochs. The result of
Table 2 suggests that the speedup ( E= 10 ) is greater than the speedup ( E= 5). This implies that
the speedup is greater if the number of epochs of the original multi-epoch training is greater.
4
Figure 1: Learning curve of LM for 65,000 iterations on subsets of LM1B with different conﬁgura-
tions.
d Parameters Epochs Iters./Epoch Speedup ( E= 10 )Speedup ( E= 5)
Left 512 45M 10 6500 3.3 1.8
Right 256 18M 10 6500 1.9 1.5
Bottom 1024 128M 10 6500 3.3 2.6
Table 2: Conﬁguration of each ﬁgure of Fig. 1.
When dropout is used, the curve is shifted upward. The magnitude of shift increases as pincreases
or as the regularization becomes stronger, which slows down the training. Furthermore, the left
ﬁgure of Fig. 1 suggests that, if dropout is used, the speed of the training does not change much
whether one epoch training or multi-epoch training is used. This suggests that each sample cannot
be memorized well under dropout, which is well-known. If the availability of data is limited (e.g.
in supervised learning) and if unsupervised pretraining does not help, one can attempt to mitigate
the gap between SandMD with the adaptive dropout as described in Appendix. Note that this
adaptive dropout is much more inefﬁcient than one epoch training if the data is plentiful, which is
our assumption.
4.2 P OWER LAW
Under the one epoch training, analyzing the training becomes simpler, since regularization does not
need to be taken into consideration.
The left ﬁgure of Fig. 2 shows the log-log plot of the curve of test loss over the iterations for
different widths. Each curve has a structure as depicted in the right ﬁgure of Fig. 4. Observe that the
curve ﬁrst enters a super-polynomial region, where the loss decreases faster than any polynomial,
since the parameters are not yet saturated with many training samples. Then, the curve enters a
linear region, which is, in fact, a power-law region, since the plot is log-log. This means on this
region the test loss follows `=ax k, where xis the number of iterations and aandkare some
constant. As the parameters are oversaturated with the training samples, the loss stagnates, and the
curve enters sub-polynomial region convergent to a constant. As the parameter budget increases,
5
Figure 2: (Left) Log-log plot of learning curve over iterations. (Right) Log-log plot of the learning
curve scaled according to the per-iteration FLOPS with respect to the d= 512 curve, which is ﬁxed
at its original position as with the scaling of the x-axis.
Figure 3: Learning curve of LM on subsets of LM1B with varying size (cited from Hestness et al.
(2017)).
the super-polynomial region and the power-law region expands, which contributes to the superior
performance of larger models. Unlike the multi-epoch setting, the loss decreases more steeply,
monotonically and for longer iterations. While the gap of loss among each model is small at the
beginning, it increases as the iteration increases.
The left ﬁgure of Fig. 4 shows the line ﬁt for the power law region of each model. Notably, the
power law exponent (about  0:067) is approximately equal to the power law exponent of found
in Hestness et al. (2017), which is shown in the left ﬁgure of Fig. 3 for convenience. The major
difference between their experiment and ours is that they trained a model with different parameter
budget sufﬁciently large for each dataset size for many epochs until the best loss is achieved. The
right ﬁgure of Fig. 3 shows the parameter budget for each dataset size.
4.3 S IZE/ITERATION ADJUSTMENT
As far as large-scale Transformer language model is concerned, modifying the architecture with
a method such as neural architecture search leads to a smaller gain compared with scaling up the
model with more data or parameter. Hence, it sufﬁces to consider changing depth and width only.
For simplicity, we consider changing only width. Let us say we train a model with the number of
parameters PforIiterations. Then, the total FLOPS of the training is proportional to PI, assuming
that the GPU is used efﬁciently, which is easy at large-scale. We are interested in ﬁnding the range
of optimal Ifor a given number of parameters (or more conveniently, width). For this, we remap
the curves in the left ﬁgure of Fig. 2 to adjust for the difference in per-iteration FLOPS and derive
the range of optimal number of iterations for a given model size as described in Appendix, which is
6
Figure 4: (Left) Log-log plot of partial learning curve of LM over iterations with a line ﬁt. (Right)
Sketch of learning curve over iterations.
d Parameters Optimal Iters. (Optimal Tokens)/Params.
256 18M [0;30000] [0;11:5]
512 45M [12000 ;84000] [1:8;12:9]
1024 128M [28000 ;1) [1:5;1)
Table 3: Optimal number of iterations and ratio.
shown in the right ﬁgure of Fig 2 and Table 3, respectively. The range of optimal number of iterations
is then converted to the number of tokens processed and divided by the number of parameters of the
model, which is shown in the rightmost column of Table 3. By taking the intersection of the ranges,
we obtain [1:8;11:5]. Since the geometric mean of the boundary values isp1:811:55, in our
heuristic for adjustment we try to make the ratio of the number of processed tokens over the number
of parameters, or T=P , as close to 5 as possible. This result suggests that ﬁve words per parameter
can be the most efﬁciently compressed, at least in our setting.
Since we have I= 65000 , the optimal width among f256;512;1024gisd= 512 , which follows
from either our heuristics or the right ﬁgure of Fig. 2. Each conﬁguration undergoes a speedup due
to changing the width to d= 512 . Table 4 summarizes the speedup achieved with size/iteration
adjustment and the total speedup combined with that of one epoch training. The result agrees with
our intuition that size/iteration adjustment would lead to a better speedup if the original size/iteration
proportion is more skewed. In terms of the combined speedup, this also agrees with this same
intuition.
5 I MPLICATIONS AND REMARKS
5.1 STATE -OF-THE-ART MODELS ARE LIKELY TO UNDERGO BETTER SPEEDUP
Table 5 shows the number of epochs and the ratio of the tokens processed over the number of
parameters of the state-of-the-art models. The original multi-epoch training is ﬁrst converted to the
one epoch counterpart, which results in an increase of the dataset size by the factor of the number of
epochs. This contributes to the ratio being substantially larger than 5. Combined with the number of
epochs being far greater than 10, it is reasonable to expect that we can accelerate the training of the
olddnewdSpeedup Combined Speedup
Left 512 512 1 3:31 = 3 :3
Right 256 512 2.7 1:92:75:1
Bottom 1024 512 1.3 3:31:34:3
Table 4: Speedup with size/iteration adjustment and total speedup.
7
Table 5: The number of epochs used for the training.
Model Epochs Tokens/Params.
BERT 40 340
Mesh Transformer 10 1.6-57
GPT-2 20 (or 100) 106 (or 530)
state-of-the-art models with the factor substantially greater than our 3.3-5.1x speedup, maybe even
by the factor of 10.
5.2 R ANGE OF APPLICABILITY
One epoch training and size/iteration adjustment are also applicable to many unsupervised learning
algorithms on data of any modality as well as semi-supervised learning as (H ´enaff et al., 2019).
Regularization methods are crucial for and more dominant in many computer vision tasks. Hence,
they may beneﬁt from one epoch training even better. It is very likely that our results hold for larger-
scale models due to the nature of our methods. We should perform more comprehensive studies to
measure how much speedup is achieved in each setting and reﬁne our heuristics for size/iteration
adjustment.
5.3 E FFICIENT NETSCALING WITH THE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS
Tan & Le (2019) showed that, for image classiﬁcation, scaling up a model by jointly searching
for the scaling factor of each scaling component (e.g. depth) with grid search leads to a dramatic
improvement over scaling up one or two components only without extensive search. In our case,
there are three scaling factors: depth, width, the number of iterations. It is reasonable to expect that
this will give more favorable scaling than heuristics.
5.4 C AVEATS ON FINE -TUNING
One notable usage of unsupervised models such as GPT-2 and BERT is ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained
model to a small specialized dataset. Since we suggest that no regularization method is used for
the training of the model, one would suspect that the lack of regularization would cause overﬁtting
during the ﬁne-tuning process. We argue this may not be necessarily the case. Note that GPT-2 does
not use any regularization method, and Devlin et al. (2018) suggests to ﬁne-tune BERT for only a
few epochs. It is also important to note that one-epoch training improves the performance of the
pre-trained model and therefore requires a smaller number of iterations on the ﬁne-tuning dataset to
reach to the same performance.
5.5 S AMPLE EFFICIENCY OF LEFT -TO-RIGHT LANGUAGE MODEL AND BERT
BERT is known to be more sample efﬁcient than other language models such as the left-to-right
language model as shown in papers as Devlin et al. (2018). We believe that one of the reasons is that,
for BERT, the mask (hence the input and the target) of a sample is different for each epoch. Under
the one epoch training, this advantage vanishes. Hence, we believe it diminishes the efﬁciency gap
between BERT and the left-to-right language model. If the efﬁciency gap is small, the latter model
is far more preferable than BERT. For example, the text generation capability of BERT is poorer
than its left-to-right counterpart. Hence, it requires the softmax to be trained from scratch for each
task upon the ﬁne-tuning, possibly different softmax for each task. On the other hand, left-to-right
language models can, in principle, perform, with not necessarily better performance, any task BERT
can perform without ﬁne-tuning, even with zero-shot learning. For example, GPT-2 can perform
text classiﬁcation by not only predicting the label (e.g. ”Math”) but also by generating a text (e.g.
”It’s about math.”). This adds far more ﬂexibility to GPT-2, and GPT-2 can be trained with various
tasks seamlessly. By exploiting this fact, one can combine various notable (training) datasets to the
general-purpose dataset as WebText for training. After the training, without ﬁne-tuning the model
may perform well on their test datasets. The performance may be improved by instead adding a few
8
copies of the added datasets instead of just one. Also, note that, while ﬁne-tuning performs well in
general, it has been scarcely investigated on whether training on narrower distribution suddenly right
after the pretraining would lead to something similar to catastrophic forgetting. After the pretraining
is ﬁnished, it may be more effective to simply mix the samples of the task of the interest to the
samples from the pretraining dataset to continue the training without performing the conventional
ﬁne-tuning.
As it was mentioned in Radford et al. (2018) that ﬁne-tuning of GPT converges within a few epochs,
it is reasonable to assume the same for GPT-2. Given the strong inﬂuence of the pretraining method
on the ﬁnal performance on the takes Under the one epoch training, GPT-2 may not need ﬁne-tuning
process if the task is known during the pre-training process, as described below.
5.6 S HIFT OF ATTENTION FROM REGULARIZATION TO MODEL CAPACITY
Deep learning research has almost always been performed under multi-epoch training with regu-
larization method, so the resulting generalization was more important than improving the actual
capacity of the model. It has been believed that large-scale training is the only viable way to mea-
sure the actual model capacity, as the regularization is not needed in this setting. This has limited
the research into improving the actual model capacity, which can be afforded only by afﬂuent re-
search groups, and proliferated the works on improving the regularization methods. However, one
epoch training may shift the attention to the improvement of model capacity. The methods prone to
overﬁtting and regarded not viable may be reexamined. Some promising ideas that tend to overﬁt
include mixture-of-experts (Shazeer et al., 2017) and optimization methods exploiting the second
order information such as K-FAC (Osawa et al., 2018).
5.7 C REATION OF NEWDATASETS AND COMPARISON OF MODELS
As mentioned above, we should create new standard datasets on which a model is trained for one
epoch only. We consider the case of language model, but a similar argument holds for other tasks
and the data of other modality. A good candidate is a subset of a dataset similar to WebText. Since
one can compare model improvement more or less regardless of the model size due to the lack of
regularization, subset larger than 400M tokens may not be always necessary. Note that the total
computation cost scales quadratically with respect to the dataset size. Since the model has to be
trained for one epoch only, substantially larger datasets can be also used for a small amount of
computation if necessary. There are two ways to compare models.
1) The dataset creator ﬁrst makes a plot similar to the right ﬁgure of Fig. 2 using a subset with,
say, 400M tokens and identiﬁes the optimal model sizes on the iterations corresponding to, say,
100M tokens, 200M tokens and 400M tokens. For example, in our experiment the optimal model
size on 100M tokens would have the width of 512. Then, the model designer would compare the
performance of the models with this optimal model size according to their performance after they
are trained on the dataset of the chosen size for one epoch.
2) This method is more precise than the above method. The model designer makes a plot similar to
the right ﬁgure of Fig. 2 using a subset with 400M tokens and his proposed model. The plot is then
combined with the plot of the state-of-the-art model by adjusting for the difference in per-iteration
FLOPS.
5.8 D ATA AUGMENTION WITH INTERNET
One can also exploit the Internet by augmenting the dataset for the task of the interest by searching
for data relevant to the task and adding it to the dataset. Often, poor performance has been attributed
to architecture or optimization. However, the actual cause is often because the dataset does not
contain a sufﬁcient amount of information useful for the task of the interest. If the model’s poor
performance is alleviated by this data augmentation, it is likely due to none other than the insufﬁcient
information. This is inevitable, since, for example, if the training dataset consists of randomly
sampled webpages, the distribution of data on Internet does not necessarily align with what a person
would have processed in his life. This mismatch would result in the sample complexity of the
language model being poorer than that of human, which is permissible to a certain extent but can be
improved by a mismatch-aware dataset sampling strategy.
9
5.9 O N SAMPLING DATA FROM INTERNET
WebText consists of the webpages that are sampled by selecting the links posted to Reddit with
more than 3 karmas. In order to increases the number of webpages by more than several order of
magnitude, the strategy of sampling should be more lenient to the corrupt webpages. Trinh & Le
(2018) pointed out that CommonCrawl contains a large portion of corrupt samples, which makes it
unsuitable for the training. The proportion of the corrupt samples in CommonCrawl is substantially
higher than 50%, hence most of the resources are spent on training on the useless corrupt samples.
One can study how the performance depends on the proportion of corrupt samples in the dataset.
From this, one can estimate the upper bound of the proportion of corrupt samples such that the
performance degradation is not signiﬁcant. For example, if the proportion can be merely 10%, the
waste of resources is rather negligible.
Having some corrupt samples in the dataset to some extent may be beneﬁcial for the model to
distinguish the corrupt webpages from the non-corrupt ones. Within the dataset containing the
webpages of both types, the distribution of the corrupt samples must be easily separated from that
of the non-corrupt samples from the perspective of the trained model. When the dataset contains
some corrupt samples, one can prevent them from generating the output that resembles the corrupt
samples as follows. For example, note that it is very unlikely that corrupt text is followed by non-
corrupt text in the same webpage, or vice versa. Hence, it is interesting to check whether a model
conditioned on a non-corrupt text almost always generates non-corrupt text. If a model happens to
start generating a corrupt text either conditionally or unconditionally, this may be detected by the
perplexity of the generated output. Corrupt text tends to have the perplexity too high or too low. This
fact may be also exploited at the training stage. For example, the samples with unusual perplexity
can be discarded from the training dataset.
The sampling method of WebText can be easily expanded or generalized. In addition to using the
karmas of Reddit and its variants on other webpages, we can utilize the meta data of each webpage
and statistical analysis of the content. For example, non-corrupt webpages must have non-negligible
amount of trafﬁc from human users rather than bots, and they must have a clearly distinct access
pattern. Also, the distribution of characters or the most frequent words of the corrupt webpages may
be different from that of the non-corrupt webpages (e.g. Zipf’s law).
6 C ONCLUSION
The following summarizes our work:
The conventional multi-epoch training can be improved by enlarging the dataset, adjusting
the model size and the number of iterations appropriately and training for one epoch only.
A heuristics for the adjustment was devised.
Overﬁtting does not occur in one epoch training, and regularization does nothing but slows
down the training.
The loss curve over the iterations for a given model size follows power-law rather exten-
sively.
Based on our analysis, we believe we can reduce the cost to train the state-of-the-art models
as BERT and GPT-2 dramatically, maybe even by the factor of 10.
One epoch training and size/iteration adjustment are promising for not only language model
but also many other unsupervised or semi-supervised learning tasks on data of any modal-
ity.
We can possibly efﬁciently scale up a model using an analog to EfﬁcientNet scaling with
not only the conventional scaling factors such as depth and width but also the number of
iterations as the scaling factors.
The sample efﬁciency gap between BERT and left-to-right language model is likely to
diminish with one epoch training. GPT-2 may replace BERT due to its ﬂexibility.
Since the overﬁtting does not occur with one epoch training, more attention will be paid
to improving model capacity, which becomes easier to observe. The methods prone to
overﬁtting and regarded not viable may be reexamined.
10
We should create new standard datasets to evaluate and compare newly proposed models
under one epoch training and size/iteration adjustment. We have provided two possible
evaluation methods with such datasets.
We discuss about data augmentation with Internet and how to efﬁciently sample data from
Internet to expand the training dataset.
Future works will hopefully verify our results and claims on larger-scale and on other kinds of tasks.
They can also continue to explore for further implications of one epoch training and model size
adjustment, as they have been scarcely investigated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Lukasz Kaiser and Isaac Poulton for his valuable feedback on our work.
REFERENCES
A. Baevski and M. Auli. Adaptive Input Representations for Neural Language Modeling. ArXiv
e-prints , September 2018.
C. Chelba, T. Mikolov, M. Schuster, Q. Ge, T. Brants, P. Koehn, and T. Robinson. One Billion Word
Benchmark for Measuring Progress in Statistical Language Modeling. ArXiv e-prints , December
2013.
Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever. Generating Long Sequences with
Sparse Transformers. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:1904.10509, Apr 2019.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V . Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Transformer-XL: Attentive Language Models Beyond a Fixed-Length Context. arXiv e-prints ,
art. arXiv:1901.02860, Jan 2019.
J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding. ArXiv e-prints , October 2018.
Olivier J. H ´enaff, Ali Razavi, Carl Doersch, S. M. Ali Eslami, and Aaron van den Oord.
Data-Efﬁcient Image Recognition with Contrastive Predictive Coding. arXiv e-prints , art.
arXiv:1905.09272, May 2019.
J. Hestness, S. Narang, N. Ardalani, G. Diamos, H. Jun, H. Kianinejad, M. M. A. Patwary, Y . Yang,
and Y . Zhou. Deep Learning Scaling is Predictable, Empirically. ArXiv e-prints , December 2017.
Jacob Menick and Nal Kalchbrenner. Generating High Fidelity Images with Subscale Pixel Net-
works and Multidimensional Upscaling. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:1812.01608, December 2018.
Kazuki Osawa, Yohei Tsuji, Yuichiro Ueno, Akira Naruse, Rio Yokota, and Satoshi Matsuoka.
Large-Scale Distributed Second-Order Optimization Using Kronecker-Factored Approximate
Curvature for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:1811.12019, Nov
2018.
Martin Popel and Ond ˇrej Bojar. Training Tips for the Transformer Model. arXiv e-prints , art.
arXiv:1804.00247, Mar 2018.
A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever. Improving Language Understanding by
Generative Pre-Training. ArXiv e-prints , June 2018.
A. Radford, W. Jeff, R. Child, D. Luan, Amodei D., and Sutskever I. Language Models are Unsu-
pervised Multitask Learners. February 2019.
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and
Jeff Dean. Outrageously Large Neural Networks: The Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer.
arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:1701.06538, Jan 2017.
11
Noam Shazeer, Youlong Cheng, Niki Parmar, Dustin Tran, Ashish Vaswani, Penporn Koanan-
takool, Peter Hawkins, HyoukJoong Lee, Mingsheng Hong, Cliff Young, Ryan Sepassi, and
Blake Hechtman. Mesh-TensorFlow: Deep Learning for Supercomputers. arXiv e-prints , art.
arXiv:1811.02084, Nov 2018.
Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting Unreasonable Ef-
fectiveness of Data in Deep Learning Era. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:1707.02968, Jul 2017.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V . Le. EfﬁcientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional Neural
Networks. arXiv e-prints , art. arXiv:1905.11946, May 2019.
Trieu H. Trinh and Quoc V . Le. A Simple Method for Commonsense Reasoning. arXiv e-prints , art.
arXiv:1806.02847, Jun 2018.
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polo-
sukhin. Attention Is All You Need. ArXiv e-prints , June 2017.
12
7 A PPENDIX
7.1 F URTHER DETAILS ON DATASET AND HYPERPARAMETERS
LM1B consists of 28 million sentences (training dataset) from news articles with about 10 thousand
sentences for test dataset (Chelba et al., 2013). Each sentence is curtailed to the ﬁrst 50 words. Each
iteration consists of a minibatch of 256 sentences, and the average length of a sentence is 27. We
set the number of layers to 6. We use word-level tokens and (not tied) adaptive input and softmax
(Baevski & Auli, 2018). The cutoff for adaptive softmax/input is [4000 ;20000 ;100000] to save the
memory budget and computation cost at the cost of slightly degraded performance. We do not use
checkpoint averaging or label smoothing. We use PyTorch with a single V100 GPU and mixed
precision training. Unlike the Transformer of Vaswani et al. (2017), LayerNorm is placed before the
self-attention module and ReLU in our case as in Child et al. (2019).
7.2 A DAPTIVE DROPOUT
If the availability of data is limited (e.g. in supervised learning) and if unsupervised pretraining does
not help, one can attempt to mitigate this problem with the adaptive dropout as described below.
The dropout probability is a monotonically increasing function of the number of epochs trained. In
particular, it is set zero for the ﬁrst epoch. It is likely that the gap between one epoch training and
multi-epoch training (see the gap in the left ﬁgure of Fig. 1) with this dropout is smaller. However,
based on the trend, the gap is still likely to increase as the number of epochs increases. Thus, this
method is much more inefﬁcient than one epoch training if the data is plentiful. Since the assumed
setting is very rare, we do not investigate this direction further.
7.3 F URTHER DETAILS ON FIG. 2
In this section, we discuss how to convert the left ﬁgure of Fig. 2 to the right ﬁgure and how to obtain
the range of the optimal number of iterations for each model size. The curve for d= 512 is ﬁxed
at the same position, but other curves are moved to take into account the difference in per-iteration
FLOPS. The per-iteration FLOPS of d= 1024 andd= 256 is 3 times larger and 2.5 times smaller
than that of d= 512 , respectively. Hence, the curve of d= 1024 is moved left by the factor of 3. A
similar operation is performed on the curve of d= 256 . The d= 256 curve and the d= 512 curve
intersects at 12,000 iterations, and the d= 512 curve and the d= 1024 curve intersects at 84,000
iterations. This means that if the model with d= 512 is used, the number of iterations should be
greater than 12,000 and less than 84,000 to minimize the computation cost. On the other hand, if
the model with d= 256 is used, the number of iterations should be less than 120002:5 = 30000 .
Likewise, if the model with d= 1024 is used, the number of iterations should be greater than
84000
3= 28000 and less than a certain upper bound.
13