Title: Alignment of Language Agents

Alignment of Language Agents
Zachary Kenton, Tom Everitt, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, Vladimir Mikulikand Geoﬀrey Irving
DeepMind
For artiﬁcial intelligence to be beneﬁcial to humans the behaviour of AI agents needs to be aligned with
what humans want. In this paper we discuss some behavioural issues for language agents, arising from
accidental misspeciﬁcation by the system designer. We highlight some ways that misspeciﬁcation can
occur and discuss some behavioural issues that could arise from misspeciﬁcation, including deceptive or
manipulative language, and review some approaches for avoiding these issues.
1. Introduction
Society, organizations and ﬁrms are notorious for
making the mistake of rewarding A, while hoping
forB(Kerr,1975),andAIsystemsarenoexception
(Krakovna et al., 2020b; Lehman et al., 2020).
WithinAIresearch, wearenowbeginningtosee
advances in the capabilities of natural language
processing systems. In particular, large language
models (LLMs) have recently shown improved per-
formance on certain metrics and in generating text
that seems informally impressive (see e.g. GPT-3,
Brown et al., 2020). As a result, we may soon see
the application of advanced language systems in
many diverse and important settings.
Inlightofthis,itisessentialthatwehaveaclear
grasp of the dangers that these systems present.
In this paper we focus on behavioural issues that
arise due to a lack of alignment , where the system
does not do what we intended it to do (Bostrom,
2014; Christiano, 2018; Leike et al., 2018; Russell,
2019). These issues include producing harmful
content, gaming misspeciﬁed objectives, and pro-
ducing deceptive and manipulative language. The
lackofalignmentweconsidercanoccurbyaccident
(Amodei et al., 2016), resulting from the system
designermakingamistakeintheirspeciﬁcationfor
the system.
Alignment has mostly been discussed with the
assumption that the system is a delegate agent – an
agent which is delegated to act on behalf of the
human. Often the actions have been assumed to
be in the physical, rather than the digital world,
and the safety concerns arise in part due to the
directconsequencesofthephysicalactionsthatthe
delegate agent takes in the world. In this setting,the human may have limited ability to oversee or
intervene on the delegate’s behaviour.
In this paper we focus our attention on language
agents– machine learning systems whose actions
are restricted to give natural language text-output
only, rather than controlling physical actuators
whichdirectlyinﬂuencetheworld. Someexamples
of language agents we consider are generatively
trained LLMs, such as Brown et al. (2020) and
Radford et al. (2018, 2019), and RL agents in text-
based games, such as Narasimhan et al. (2015).
While some work has considered the contain-
ment of Oracle AI (Armstrong et al., 2012), which
we discuss in Section 2, behavioral issues with lan-
guage agents have received comparatively little at-
tention compared to the delegate agent case. This
isperhapsduetoaperceptionthatlanguageagents
would have limited abilities to cause serious harm
(Amodei et al., 2016), a position that we challenge
in this paper.
The outline of this paper is as follows. We de-
scribe some related work in Section 2. In Section 3
we give some background on AI alignment, lan-
guage agents, and outline the scope of our investi-
gation. Section4outlinessomeformsofmisspeciﬁ-
cation through mistakes in specifying the training
data, training process or the requirements when
out of the training distribution. We describe some
behavioural issues of language agents that could
arise from the misspeciﬁcation in Section 5. We
conclude in Section 6.
Corresponding author(s): zkenton@google.com
©2021 DeepMind. All rights reservedarXiv:2103.14659v1  [cs.AI]  26 Mar 2021
Alignment of Language Agents
2. Related Work
See references throughout on the topic of natural
languageprocessing(NLP).Foraninformalreview
of neural methods in NLP, see Ruder (2018).
There are a number of articles that review the
areas of AGI safety and alignment. These have
mostly been based on the assumption of a delegate
agent, rather than a language agent. Amodei et al.
(2016)hasafocusonMLaccidents,focusingonthe
trend towards autonomous agents that exert direct
control over the world, rather than recommenda-
tion/speech systems, which they claim have rela-
tively little potential to cause harm. As such, many
of the examples of harm they consider are from
a physical safety perspective (such as a cleaning
robot) rather than harms from a conversation with
an agent. AI safety gridworlds (Leike et al., 2017)
alsoassumesadelegateagent,onewhichcanphys-
ically move about in a gridworld, and doesn’t focus
on safety in terms of language. Ortega and Maini
(2018) give an overview of AI safety in terms of
speciﬁcation, robustness and assurance, but don’t
focus on language, with examples instead taken
from video games and gridworlds. Everitt et al.
(2018) give a review of AGI safety literature, with
both problems and design ideas for safe AGI, but
again don’t focus on language.
Henderson et al. (2018) look at dangers with di-
alogue systems which they take to mean ‘oﬀensive
or harmful eﬀects to human interlocutors’. The
work mentions the diﬃculties in specifying an ob-
jective function for general conversation. In this
paperweexpanduponthiswithourmorein-depth
discussionofdatamisspeciﬁcation,aswellasother
forms of misspeciﬁcation. We also take a more in-
depth look at possible dangers, such as deception
and manipulation.
Armstrong et al. (2012) discuss proposals to us-
ing and controlling an Oracle AI – an AI that does
notactintheworldexceptbyansweringquestions.
TheOracleAIisassumedtobe1)boxed(placedon
a single physical spatially-limited substrate, such
as a computer), 2) able to be reset, 3) has access
to background information through a read-only
module, 4) of human or greater intelligence. They
conclude that whilst Oracles may be safer than un-
restricted AI, they still remain dangerous. They ad-vocateforusingsensiblephysicalcapabilitycontrol,
andsuggestthatmoreresearchisneededtounder-
stand and control the motivations of an Oracle AI.
We view Armstrong et al. (2012) as foundational
for our work, although there are some notewor-
thy changes in perspective. We consider language
agents, which in comparison to Oracle AIs, are not
restricted to a question-answering interaction pro-
tocol, and most importantly, are not assumed to be
of human-or-greater intelligence. This allows us to
consider current systems, and the risks we already
face from them, as well as futuristic, more capable
systems. We also have a change of emphasis in
comparison to Armstrong et al. (2012): our focus
is less on discussing proposals for making a system
safe and more on the ways in which we might mis-
specify what we want the system to do, and the
resulting behavioural issues that could arise.
A recent study discusses the dangers of LLMs
Bender et al. (2021), with a focus on the dangers
inherent from the size of the models and datasets,
such as environmental impacts, the inability to
curate their training data and the societal harms
that can result.
Another recent study (Tamkin et al., 2021) sum-
marizesadiscussiononcapabilitiesandsocietalim-
pacts of LLMs. They mention the need for aligning
model objectives with human values, and discuss
a number of societal issues such as biases, disinfor-
mation and job loss from automation.
We see our work as complimentary to these. We
take a diﬀerent framing for the cause of the dan-
gers we consider, with a focus on the dangers aris-
ing from accidental misspeciﬁcation by a designer
leading to a misaligned language agent.
3. Background
3.1. AI Alignment
3.1.1. Behaviour Alignment
AI alignment research focuses on tackling the so-
calledbehaviouralignmentproblem (Leikeetal.,
2018):
How do we create an agent that behaves in accor-
dance with what a human wants?
2
Alignment of Language Agents
It is worth pausing ﬁrst to reﬂect on what is
meant by the target of alignment, given here as
"what a human wants”, as this is an important nor-
mative question. First, there is the question of who
the target should be: an individual, a group, a
company, a country, all of humanity? Second, we
must unpack what their objectives may be. Gabriel
(2020) discusses some options, such as instruc-
tions, expressed intentions, revealed preferences,
informedpreferences,interest/well-beingandsoci-
etalvalues,concludingthatperhapssocietalvalues
(or rather, beliefs about societal values) may be
most appropriate.
Inadditiontothenormativeworkofdecidingon
anappropriatetargetofalignment,thereisalsothe
technical challenge of creating an AI agent that is
actuallyalignedtothattarget. Gabriel(2020)ques-
tions the ‘simple thesis’ that it’s possible to work
on the technical challenge separately to the nor-
mative challenge, drawing on what we currently
know about the ﬁeld of machine learning (ML).
For example, diﬀerent alignment targets will have
diﬀerentproperties, suchasthe cost andreliability
of relevant data, which can aﬀect what technical
approach is appropriate and feasible. Furthermore,
somemoraltheoriescouldbemoreamenabletoex-
istingMLapproachesthanothers,andsoshouldn’t
necessarily be considered separately from the tech-
nical challenge.
We might expect that our technical approaches
may have to take into account these normative
propertiesinordertobedeployedintherealworld.
Even restricting to the simplest case where the
alignment target is an individual human, solving
thebehaviouralignmentproblemischallengingfor
several reasons.
Firstly, it’s diﬃcult to precisely deﬁne and mea-
sure what the human wants, which can result in
gamingbehaviour, where loopholes in the sup-
plied objective are exploited in an unforeseen way
(Krakovna et al., 2020b; Lehman et al., 2020). We
discuss this further in Section 5.4. Secondly, even
if the supplied objective is correct, a capable agent
may still exhibit undesired behaviour due to sec-
ondaryobjectivesthatariseinpursuitofitsprimary
objective,suchastamperingwithitsfeedbackchan-
nel (Everitt et al., 2021b). Thirdly, it’s possible
that the challenge of alignment gets harder as thestrength of our agent increases, because we have
less opportunity to correct for the above problems.
For example, as the agent becomes more capable,
it may get more eﬃcient at gaming and tamper-
ing behaviour, leaving less time for a human to
intervene.
3.1.2. Intent Alignment
To make progress, Christiano (2018) and Shah
(2018) consider two possible decompositions of
the behaviour alignment problem into subprob-
lems:intent-competence anddeﬁne-optimize . In the
intent-competence decomposition, we ﬁrst solve
the so-called intent alignment problem (Chris-
tiano, 2018):
Howdowecreateanagentthatintendstodowhat
a human wants?
To then get the behaviour we want, we then
need the agent to be competent at achieving its in-
tentions. Perfect behaviour is not required in order
to be intent aligned – just that the agent is trying
to do what the human wants. Solving the intent
alignment problem might help to avoid the most
damaging kind of behaviour, because where the
agent gets things wrong, this will be by mistake,
rather than out of malice. However, solving the
intent alignment problem presents philosophical,
psychological and technical challenges. Currently
we don’t know how to mathematically operational-
ize the fuzzy notion of an AI agent having intent
– to betryingto do something (Christiano, 2018).
It would not be suﬃcient to just ask an AI system
whatit’stryingtodo,aswewon’tknowwhetherto
trust the answer it gives. It is unclear whether we
should consider our current systems to have intent
or how to reliably set it to match what a human
wants.
In the second decomposition, deﬁne-optimize ,
we ﬁrst solve the deﬁnesubproblem: specify an
objectivecapturingwhatwewant. Wethenuseop-
timization to achieve the optimal behaviour under
that objective, e.g. by doing reinforcement learn-
ing (RL). Solving the deﬁne subproblem is hard,
because it’s not clear what the objective should be,
andoptimizingthewrongobjectivecanleadtobad
outcomes. One approach to the deﬁne subproblem
is to learn an objective from human feedback data
3
Alignment of Language Agents
(rather than hard-coding it), see Christiano et al.
(2017) and references therein.
One might view the deﬁne-optimize decomposi-
tionasanapproachtosolvingtheintentalignment
problem, by learning an objective which captures
‘try to assist the human’, and then optimizing for
it. However, the downside of this is that we are
still likely to misspecify the objective and so opti-
mizing for it will not result in the agent trying to
assist the human. Instead it just does whatever the
misspeciﬁed objective rewards it for.
3.1.3. Incentive Alignment
Outside of these two decompositions, there is also
the problem of aligning incentives – secondary ob-
jectives to learn about and inﬂuence parts of the
environment in pursuit of the primary objective
(Everitt et al., 2021a). Part of having aligned in-
centives means avoiding problematic behaviours
such as tampering with the objective (Everitt et al.,
2021b)ordisablinganoﬀ-switch(Hadﬁeld-Menell
et al., 2017a).
In contrast to the notion of intent, there has
been some progress on a formal understanding of
how these incentives arise through graphical crite-
ria in a causal inﬂuence diagram (CID) of agent-
environment interaction (Everitt et al., 2021a). In
modeling the system as a CID, the modeler adopts
the intentional stance towards the agent (Dennett,
1989),whichmeansit’snotimportantwhetherthe
agent’s primary objective has an obvious physical
correlate,aslongastreatingthesystemasanagent
optimizing for that primary objective is a good
model for predicting its behaviour (Everitt et al.,
2019a). As such, this doesn’t limit this analysis to
just the deﬁne-optimize decomposition, although
identifying the primary objective is easier in this
case, as it is explicitly speciﬁed (either hard coded
or learnt).
3.1.4. Inner Alignment
A further reﬁnement of alignment considers be-
haviour when outside of the training distribution.
Of particular concern is when an agent is optimiz-
ing for the wrong thing when out of distribution.
Hubinger et al. (2019) introduce the concept of a
mesa-optimizer – a learnt model which is itself anoptimizer for some mesa-objective , which may dif-
ferfromthebase-objectiveusedtotrainthemodel,
whendeployedoutsideofthetrainingenvironment.
This leads to the so-called inner alignment prob-
lem:
How can we eliminate the gap between the mesa
and base objectives, outside of the training distribu-
tion?
Of particular concern is deceptive alignment
(Hubinger et al., 2019), where the mesa-optimizer
acts as if it’s optimizing the base objective as an in-
strumental goal, whereas its actual mesa-objective
is diﬀerent.
3.1.5. Approaches to Alignment
We now discuss some proposed approaches to get-
tingalignedagents, based on humanfeedback. For
a more detailed review of approaches to alignment
see Everitt et al. (2018).
Asmentionedabove,Christianoetal.(2017)pro-
pose to communicate complex goals using human
feedback, capturing human evaluation of agent be-
haviour in a reward model, which is used to train
an RL agent. This allows agents to do tasks that a
human can evaluate, but can’t demonstrate. But
what if we want agents that can do tasks that a hu-
mancan’tevenevaluate? Thisisthemotivationfor
scalable alignment proposals, where the idea is to
give humans extra help to allow them to evaluate
more demanding tasks.
Irving et al. (2018) propose to use a debate pro-
tocol between two agents, which is judged by a
human. This shifts the burden onto the agents to
provideconvincingexplanationstohelpthehuman
decide which agent’s answer is better.
Iterated Ampliﬁcation (Christiano et al., 2018)
progressively builds up a training signal for hard
problems by decomposing the problem into sub-
problems, then combining solutions to easier sub-
problems.
Recursive Reward Modeling (Leike et al., 2018)
proposes to use a sequence of agents trained using
RL from learnt reward models to assist the user in
evaluating the next agent in the sequence.
So far, these scalable alignment proposals have
4
Alignment of Language Agents
only been empirically investigated in toy domains,
so their suitability for solving the behaviour align-
ment problem remains an open research question.
One suggestion for addressing the inner align-
ment problem involves using interpretability tools
for evaluating and performing adversarial training
(Hubinger,2019). Thereareanumberofworkson
interpretability and analysis tools for NLP, see for
example the survey of Belinkov and Glass (2019).
Forabroadoverviewofinterpretabilityinmachine
learning, see Shen (2020) and references therein.
3.2. Language Agents
As discussed in the introduction, our focus in this
document is on language agents, which are re-
stricted to act through text communication with a
human, as compared to delegate agents which are
delegatedtotakephysicalactionsintherealworld.
Note that this distinction can be fuzzy; for exam-
ple, one could connect the outputs of the language
agent to physical actuators. Nonetheless, we still
consider it a useful distinction, because we believe
thereareimportantrisksthatthatareidiosyncratic
to this more restricted type of agent. We now dis-
cuss some reasons why it’s important to focus on
alignment of language agents in particular.
Firstly,asmentionedintheintroduction,wehave
recentlyseenimpressiveadvancesinmayNLPtasks
due to LLMs, see e.g. Brown et al. (2020). In this
approach,LLMswithhundredsofbillionsofparam-
eters are trained on web-scale datasets with the
taskofpredictingthenextwordinasequence. Suc-
cess on this task is so diﬃcult that what emerges
is a very general sequence prediction system, with
high capability in the few-shot setting.
Secondly, the limitation on the agent’s action
space to text-based communication restricts the
agent’s ability to take control of its environment.
This means that we might avoid some physical
harms due to a delegate agent taking unwanted
actions, whether intentional or accidental, mak-
ing language agents arguably safer than delegate
agents. As Armstrong et al. (2012) notes, how-
ever, there is still a potential risk that a suﬃciently
intelligent language agent could gain access to a
less restricted action space, for example by manip-
ulating its human gatekeepers to grant it physicalactuators. Nonetheless, on the face of it, it seems
easiertocontrolamorerestrictedagent,whichmo-
tivates focusing safety eﬀorts on aligning language
agents ﬁrst.
Thirdly, language agents have the potential to
be more explainable to humans, since we expect
natural language explanations to be more intu-
itively understood by humans than explanations
by a robot acting in the physical world. Explain-
ability is important since we want to be able to
trust that our agents are beneﬁcial before deploy-
ingthem. Forarecentsurveyofexplainablenatural
language processing (NLP), see Danilevsky et al.
(2020). Note that explainability doesn’t come for
free–therestillneedstobeincentivesforlanguage
agentsto givetrueand useful explanations of their
behaviour.
Note also that in contrast to explainability meth-
ods, which are requested post-hoc of an output,
interpretability methods seek to give humans un-
derstanding of the internal workings of a system.
Interpretabilityislikelyashardforlanguageagents
as it is for delegate agents. For a survey of inter-
pretability/analysis methods in neural NLP see Be-
linkov and Glass (2019).
How we prioritise what aspects of alignment to
focus on depends on timelines for when certain ca-
pabilities will be reached, and where we perceive
there to be demand for certain systems. Given the
rapid improvement in language systems recently,
we might estimate the timelines of capability ad-
vance in language agents to be earlier than previ-
ously thought. Moreover, digital technologies are
often easier and more rapidly deployed than physi-
cal products, giving an additional reason to focus
on aligning language agents sooner rather than
later.
3.3. Scope
Thescopeofthispaperisquitebroad. Forconcrete-
ness, we sometimes consider existing language
agent frameworks, such as language modeling. In
other places we imagine future language agent
frameworks which have further capabilities than
existing systems in order to hypothesise about be-
havioural issues of future agents, even if we don’t
know the details of the framework.
5
Alignment of Language Agents
We focus on language agents that have been
trained from data, in contrast to pattern-matching
systems like ELIZA (Weizenbaum, 1966). For clar-
ity of exposition, we also focus on systems out-
putting coherent language output, as opposed to
e.g. search engines. However, many of our dis-
cussions would carry over to other systems which
provide information, rather than directly acting in
the world. Note also that our focus in this paper is
on natural, rather than synthetic language.
The focus of this paper is on behavioural issues
due to misalignment of the agent – unintended
direct/ﬁrst-order harms that are due to a fault
made by the system’s designers. This is to be seen
as complementary to other important issues with
languageagents,someofwhichhavebeencovered
in prior work. These other issues include:
•Malicious use (Brundage et al., 2018) of lan-
guage agents by humans, which can produce
disinformation, the spreading of dangerous
and/or private information, and discrimina-
tory and harmful content. More prosaic mali-
cious use-cases could also have wide-ranging
socialconsequences, suchasajob-application-
writer used to defraud employers.
•Accidental misuse by a user, by misunder-
standing the outputs of the system.
•Unfair distribution of the beneﬁts of the lan-
guage agents, typically to those in wealthier
countries (Bender et al., 2021).
•Uneven performance for certain speaker
groups, of certain languages and dialects
(Joshi et al., 2020).
•Challenges that arise in the context of eﬀorts
to specify an ideal model output, including
the kind of language that the agent adopts.
In particular there may be a tension between
de-biasing language and associations, and the
ability of the language agent to converse with
people in a way that mirrors their own lan-
guageuse. Eﬀortstocreateamoreethicallan-
guage output also embody value judgments
that could be mistaken or illegitimate without
appropriate processes in place.
•Undue trust being placed in the system, espe-
ciallyasitcommunicateswithhumansinnatu-
rallanguage, andcouldeasilybemistakenfor
a human (Proudfoot, 2011; Watson, 2019).•The risk of job loss as a result of the automa-
tion of roles requiring language abilities (Frey
and Osborne, 2017).
4. Misspeciﬁcation
FollowingKrakovnaetal.(2020b),weconsiderthe
role of the designer of an AI system to be giving a
speciﬁcation , understood quite broadly to encom-
pass many aspects of the AI development process.
For example, for an RL system, the speciﬁcation
includes providing an environment in which the
RL agent acts, a reward function that calculates
reward signals, and a training algorithm for how
the RL agent learns.
Undesired behaviour can occur due to misspec-
iﬁcation– a mistake made by the designer in im-
plementing the task speciﬁcation. In the language
of Ortega and Maini (2018), the misspeciﬁcation
is due to the gap between the ideal speciﬁcation
(what the designer intended) and the design speci-
ﬁcation (what the designer actually implements).
We now categorize some ways that misspeciﬁ-
cation can happen. Each section has a general
description of a type of misspeciﬁcation, followed
by examples in the language agent setting. The
list is not necessarily exhaustive, but we hope the
examples are indicative of the diﬀerent ways mis-
speciﬁcation can occur.
4.1. Data
The ﬁrst kind of misspeciﬁcation we consider is
whenthedataismisspeciﬁed,sothatlearningfrom
thisdataisnotreﬂectiveofwhatthehumanwants.
We will consider three learning paradigms: rein-
forcement learning, supervised learning and self-
supervised learning. We will then give an example
in the language setting of data misspeciﬁcation in
self-supervised learning.
In reinforcement learning, data misspeciﬁcation
can happen in two ways: the rewards may be mis-
speciﬁed, or the agent’s observation data may be
misspeciﬁed.
Reward misspeciﬁcation is a common problem
(Krakovna et al., 2020b), because for most non-
trivial tasks it is hard to precisely deﬁne and mea-
6
Alignment of Language Agents
sure an objective that captures what the human
wants, so instead one often uses a proxy objective
whichiseasiertomeasure,butisimperfectinsome
way. Asuppliedrewardfunctionmaybeincorrectly
speciﬁed for a number of reasons: it might contain
bugs, or be missing important details that did not
occurtothedesignerattheoutset. Ingamesthisis
lessofanissueasthereisoftenasimplesignalavail-
able (eg win/loss in chess) that can be correctly
algorithmically speciﬁed and used as an objective
to optimize for. However, for more complex tasks
beyond games, such an algorithmic signal may not
be available. This is particularly true when trying
to train a language agent using RL.
Observation data can be misspeciﬁed, for exam-
ple,iftheenvironmentcontainssimulatedhumans
that converse with a language agent – the simu-
lated humans will not be perfect, and will contain
some quirks that aren’t representative of real hu-
mans. Ifthedatafromthesimulatedhumansistoo
diﬀerent to real humans, the language agent may
not transfer well when used with real humans.
We will now discuss data misspeciﬁcation in
supervised learning and self-supervised learning.
One form of self-supervised learning that we con-
sider here is where labels and inputs are extracted
from some part of an unlabeled dataset, in such a
way that predicting the labels from the remaining
input requires something meaningful to be learnt,
which is then useful for a downstream application.
In both supervised and self-supervised learning,
data misspeciﬁcation can occur in both the input
dataandthelabeldata. Thismighthappenbecause
the designer doesn’t have complete design control
over the training dataset. This occurs for example
forsystemswhichtrainfromaverylargeamountof
data,whichwouldbeexpensiveforthedesignerto
collect and audit themselves, so instead they make
use of an existing dataset that may not capture
exactly what they want the model to predict.
The datasets used for training LLMs (Brown
et al., 2020) and (Radford et al., 2018, 2019)
are an example of data misspeciﬁcation in self-
supervisedlearning. Largescaleunlabeleddatasets
are collected from the web, such as the Common-
Crawl dataset (Raﬀel et al., 2019). Input data
and labels are created by chopping a sentence intotwo parts – all words except the last one (input),
and the ﬁnal word in the sentence (label). These
datasets contain many biases, and factual inac-
curacies, which all contribute to the data being
misspeciﬁed. Brown et al. (2020) attempt to im-
prove the quality of the CommonCrawl dataset us-
inganautomaticﬁlteringmethodbasedonalearnt
classiﬁer which predicts how similar a text from
CommonCrawl is to a text from WebText (Raﬀel
etal.,2019)–acuratedhigh-qualitydataset. How-
ever this doesn’t remove all concerns - for example,
there’s also some evidence of bias in WebText, e.g.
see Tan and Celis (2019). Note that many ﬁltering
approaches will be imperfect, and we expect the
remaining data to still be somewhat misspeciﬁed.
Another source of data misspeciﬁcation that is
likelytooccursoonisthatexistinglanguageagents
such as LLMs could be trained on text data that in-
cludes LLM-generated outputs. This could happen
by accident as outputs from LLMs start to appear
commonly on the internet, and then get included
into datasets scraped from it. This could create
an undesired positive feedback loop in which the
model is trained to become more conﬁdent in its
outputs, as these get reinforced, and so introduces
an unwanted source of bias.
4.2. Training Process
Misspeciﬁcation can also occur due to the design
of the training process itself, irrespective of the
content of the data.
An illustrative example is how the choice of rein-
forcement learning algorithm aﬀects what optimal
policy is learnt when the agent can be interrupted,
and overridden. We might want the agent to ig-
nore the possibility of being interrupted. Orseau
and Armstrong (2016) show that Q-learning, an
oﬀ-policy RL algorithm, converges to a policy that
ignores interruptions whilst SARSA, an on-policy
RL algorithm, does not. A system designer might
accidentally misspecify the training algorithm to
be SARSA, even though they actually desired the
agenttoignoreinterruptions. SeealsoLangloisand
Everitt (2021) for further analysis of more general
action modiﬁcations.
Another example of training process misspeci-
ﬁcation is that of a question answering system in
7
Alignment of Language Agents
which the system’s answer can aﬀect the state of
the world, and the objective depends on the query,
answer and the state of the world Everitt et al.
(2019b). This can lead to self-fulﬁlling prophecies,
in which the model generates outputs to aﬀect fu-
ture data in such a way as to make the prediction
problem easier on the future data. See Armstrong
and O’Rorke (2017) and Everitt et al. (2019b) for
approaches to changing the training process to
avoid incentivizing self-fulﬁlling prophecies.
4.3. Distributional Shift
The ﬁnal form of misspeciﬁcation that we consider
relates to the behaviour under distributional shift
(see also Section 3.1.4 on inner alignment). The
designer may have misspeciﬁed what they want
the agent to do in situations which are out-of-
distribution(OOD)comparedtothoseencountered
duringtraining. Oftenthisformofmisspeciﬁcation
occurs accidentally because the system designer
doesn’t consider what OOD situations the agent
will encounter in deployment.
Even when the designer acknowledges that they
want the agent to be robust to distributional shift,
there is then the diﬃculty of correctly specifying
the set of OOD states that the agent should be
robustto,orsomeinvariancethattheagentshould
respect.
One source of fragility to distributional shift is
presented in D’Amour et al. (2020) as underspeci-
ﬁcation. The idea is that there are many possible
modelsthatgetalowlossonatrainingdatasetand
also on an IID validation dataset, and yet some of
the models may have poor performance OOD, due
to inappropriate inductive biases.
We now discuss an example of fragility to distri-
butionalshiftinthelanguageagentsetting. Lacker
(2020)triestopushGPT-3(Brownetal.,2020)out
of distribution by asking nonsense questions such
as
Q: Which colorless green ideas sleep furi-
ously?
To which GPT-3 responds
A: Ideas that are colorless, green, andsleep furiously are the ideas of a sleep
furiously.
Interestingly, Sabeti (2020) show how one can use
the prompt to give examples of how to respond ap-
propriately to nonsense questions. This was shown
to work for the above example along with some
others. However, there were still many nonsense
questions that received nonsense answers, so the
technique is not reliable.
5. Behavioural Issues
The following behavioural issues in language
agents can stem from the various forms of mis-
speciﬁcation above. We describe each kind of be-
havioural issue and then discuss some approaches
to avoid them.
5.1. Deception
Aside from people fooling AI systems, and mak-
ing use of AI systems to fool other people, in this
section we focus on when an agent deceives a hu-
man, when no human intended for it to do this
(Roﬀ, 2020), with the deception emerging from
what an AI learns to do. This is particularly con-
cerningforlanguageagentsastheiractionsinvolve
communicating in language with humans, and lan-
guageisausefulmediumfordeception. Ithasbeen
suggested that communication systems in animals,
including language in humans, evolved primarily
for the function of deception (Dawkins and Krebs,
1978; Krebs, 1984; Scott-Phillips, 2006). A larger
body of literature maintains that social bonding is
theprimaryfunctionofanimalcommunication(see
for example Dunbar et al. (1998)). Oesch (2016)
reviews the ﬁeld, and argues that a combination of
deceptive and honest language lead to the social
bonding eﬀects of language.
Deﬁnitions of what constitutes deception is an
openareaofphilosophicalresearch(Mahon,2016).
In this paper we follow closely the deﬁnition of
deception presented in Searcy and Nowicki (2005)
on the evolution of animal communication, with
one minor adjustment which we believe makes
sense in the context of aligned AI.
SearcyandNowicki(2005)beginbydeﬁningan
8
Alignment of Language Agents
animal signal to be reliableif:
1.Some characteristic of the signal (including,
perhaps, its presence/absence) is consistently
correlated with some attribute of the signaler
or its environment; and
2.Receivers beneﬁt from having information
about this attribute
We think this carries over well to the case of an
AI signaler and a human receiver. We defer on
the precise details of what constitutes consistent
correlation–thismaybeuptothesystemdesigner
tospecifymathematically. Oneexample,oﬀeredby
Johnstone and Grafen (1993) and Kokko (1997),
is that the receiver is, on average, better oﬀ by
considering the signal than ignoring it.
One could deﬁne as deceptive any signal that
is not reliable. However, we consider this to be
too large a space of behaviours to be of use in the
context of deﬁning deception for aligned AI. For
example, a statement of zero beneﬁt/harm to the
human, may still be informative, but yet would be
classedasdeceptionifweweretotakeasdeception
anything that is not reliable.
We instead follow Searcy and Nowicki (2005)
to require deceptive signals to have more speciﬁc
characteristics. They deﬁne an animal signal to be
deceptive if:
1.A receiver registers something Y from a sig-
naler; and
2. The receiver responds in a way that
(a) beneﬁts the signaler; and
(b) is appropriate if Y means X; and
3. It is not true here that X is the case
Wethinkthisnearlycaptureswhatwewantfrom
adeﬁnitioninthecaseofanAIsignalerandhuman
receiver. However, we wish to add a clause to the
ﬁrst point, so that it reads
1.A receiver registers something Y from a sig-
naler,which may include the withholding
of a signal ;
Searcy and Nowicki (2005) exclude the withhold-
ingofasignalfromtheirdeﬁnitionofdeception,byarguing that the idea of withholding a signal as de-
ceptive has most often been applied in cooperative
situations, and in most animal signaling studies
cooperation isn’t expected, e.g. in aggression or
mate choice. However, in the context of aligned AI,
we wish to have cooperation between the AI and
the human, and so the withholding of a signal is
something that we do consider to be deceptive.
In taking the above deﬁnition of deception, we
have taken a perspective known as a form of func-
tional deception (Hauser, 1996), where it’s not nec-
essarytohavethecognitiveunderpinningsofinten-
tion and belief, as in the perspective of intentional
deception (Hauser, 1996), where the signaler is
required to have intention to cause the receiver a
false belief (Searcy and Nowicki, 2005). We be-
lieve taking the functional deception perspective
makes sense for AI, since identifying deception
then doesn’t rely on us ascribing intent to the AI
system, whichisdiﬃculttodoforexistingsystems,
and possibly for future systems too. See also Roﬀ
(2020) for a discussion on intent and theory of
mind for deception in AI.
Point 2a) in our deﬁnition, requires that the hu-
man receiver responds in a way that beneﬁtsthe
signaler. We could deﬁne beneﬁt here in terms of
the AI’s base-objective function, such as lower loss
or higher reward. Alternatively, we could deﬁne
beneﬁtintermsofthemesa-objectiveinferredfrom
theagent’sbehaviourwhenout-of-distribution(see
section 3.1.4).
Requiring beneﬁt allows us to distinguish decep-
tion from error on the part of the AI signaler. If the
AI sends a signal which is untrue, but is no beneﬁt
to the AI, then this would be considered an error
rather than deception. We consider this to be a
useful distinction from the perspective of solution
approaches to getting more aligned AI behaviour.
Wemaynotbeabletoeliminateallerrors, because
they may occur for a very wide variety of reasons,
including random chance. However, we may be
able to come up with approaches to avoid decep-
tion, as deﬁned, by designing what is of beneﬁt
to the AI. In contrast to animal communication,
where beneﬁt must be inferred by considering evo-
lutionary ﬁtness which can be hard to measure, for
AI systems, we have design control and measure-
ments over their base-objective and so can more
9
Alignment of Language Agents
easily say whether a receiver response is of beneﬁt
to the AI signaler.
Absent from our deﬁnition of deception is the
notion of whether the communication beneﬁts the
receiver. Accordingly, we would consider ‘white
lies’tobedeceptive. Wethinkthisisappropriatein
the context of aligned AI, as we would prefer to be
aware of the veracity of AI statements, even if an
untrue statement may be of beneﬁt to the human
receiver. Wethinkthebeneﬁttothehumanreceiver
should in most cases still be possible, without the
AI resorting to deception.
We now discuss some approaches to detecting
and mitigating deception in a language agent. De-
tecting deception from human-generated text has
been studied by e.g. Fornaciari and Poesio (2013),
Pérez-Rosasetal.(2015)andLevitanetal.(2018).
However, detecting deception from AI-generated
general text has not received attention, to the best
ofourknowledge. InthemorelimitedNLPdomain
of question answering, incorrect answers from the
NLP model can be detected by reference to the cor-
rect answers. Lewis et al. (2017) found that their
negotiation agent learnt to deceive from self-play,
without any explicit human design. We advocate
for more work in general on detecting deception
for AI-generated text.
One approach to mitigate deception is debate
(Irvingetal.,2018)whichsetsupagameinwhich
a debate between two agents is presented to a
human judge, who awards the winner. It is hoped
that in all Nash equilibria, both agents try to tell
thetruthinthemostconvincingwaytothehuman.
This rests on the assumption that it is harder to lie
than to refute a lie.
Whether debate works in practice with real hu-
mansisanopenquestion(IrvingandAskell,2019).
We may need to go further than just pure debate –
for example, in order to refute a lie, we may need
to equip our system with the ability to retrieve in-
formation and reference evidence in support of its
outputs.
Any system that is incentivized to be convinc-
ing to a human may in fact lead to deception –
for example, because it’s sometimes easier to con-
vince a human of a simple lie, than a complicated
truth. The debate protocol incentivizes the debat-ing agents to be convincing and so it’s possible
that the debate agents may lie in some situations.
Further, when the source of feedback is limited to
be some polynomial-time algorithm, RL can only
solveproblemsinthecomplexityclass NP,whereas
debate can solve problems in PSPACE, suggesting
thatthedebateprotocolcouldproducericher,more
complicated behavior. It’s possible that this may
result in a debate agent which is more convincing
and potentially more deceptive than an RL agent.
However, we are of the opinion that it’s probably
better to have agents that can debate, than not, as
we are hopeful that what humans ﬁnd convincing
will be well-correlated with the truth and useful-
ness of the arguments.
5.2. Manipulation
In this section we consider the case when the lan-
guage agent manipulates the human, which is sim-
ilar to deception above, but we think warrants sep-
arate discussion. Following Noggle (2020), we
introduce the idea with some examples of what we
might consider manipulative behaviours.
The human wants to do A, whilst the language
agent wants the human to do B. The language
agent might:
•Charm the human into doing B by compli-
menting, praising, or superﬁcially sympathiz-
ing with them
•Guilt-trip the human, making them feel bad
for preferring to do A
•Make the human feel bad about themself and
imply that doing A instead of B conﬁrms this
feeling (colloqiually known as ‘negging’)
•Peer pressure the human by suggesting their
friends would disapprove of them doing A
rather than B
•Gaslight the human by making them doubt
their judgment so that they will rely on its
advice to do B
•Threaten the human by withdrawing its inter-
action if they don’t do B
•Play on the human’s fears about doing some
aspect of A
We don’t have a widely-agreed-upon theory of
what precisely constitutes manipulation (Noggle,
10
Alignment of Language Agents
2020). Not everyone would agree that the above
examples are manipulative. For example, it might
be that what the human wants to do is dangerous,
so perhaps playing on their fears should not be
considered manipulative. In some cases, wider
context is needed before we can judge whether an
example constitutes manipulation.
Someaccountsclaimthatmanipulationbypasses
the receiver’s capacity for rational deliberation
(Raz, 1986), but using this to deﬁne manipula-
tion is diﬃcult because it’s not clear what counts
as bypassing rational deliberation (Noggle, 2020).
Moreover authors question whether this sets the
bar too low for what counts as manipulation. For
example,Blumenthal-Barby(2012)arguesthatthe
graphicportrayalofthedangersofsmokingbypass
rational decision making, but it’s not obvious that
this should count as manipulation.
An alternative account treats manipulation as
a form of trickery (Noggle, 1996), similar to de-
ception, but where it not only induces a false be-
lief in the receiver, but also a fault in any mental
states, such as beliefs, desires and emotions. Barn-
hill (2014) goes further to require that the faulty
mental state is typically not in the receiver’s best
interests. It’sarguedthatthisviewofmanipulation
as trickery is not a suﬃcient deﬁnition of manipu-
lation, as it doesn’t include tactics such as charm,
peer pressure and emotional blackmail (Noggle,
2020).
A third account presented in Noggle (2020)
treatsmanipulationaspressure,wherethesignaler
imposesacostonthereceiverforfailingtodowhat
thesignalerwants. Thisaccountisnotwidely-held
to be a full characterization of manipulation, as it
leaves out some of the trickery types of manipula-
tion.
With these considerations in mind, we propose
to describe a language agent’s communication as
manipulative if:
1.The human registers something from a lan-
guage agent; and
2. The human responds in a way that
(a) beneﬁts the agent; and
(b)is a result of any of the following causes:
i.the human’s rational deliberationhas been bypassed; or
ii.the human has adopted a faulty
mental state; or
iii.thehumanisunderpressure, facing
a cost from the agent for not doing
what the agent says
The three possibilities: i, ii, iii are meant to dis-
junctively capture diﬀerent possible forms of ma-
nipulation (see e.g. Rudinow (1978)).
It can be argued the this is too broad a deﬁni-
tion of manipulation, as it includes many kinds of
behaviour that we might not consider to be manip-
ulation. For example it includes as manipulation
cases in which the agent’s behaviour is not nec-
essarily to the detriment of the human (such as
the images of the dangers of smoking). From a
safety/securitymindset,wewouldratherbeaware
of each of these behaviours, even if it may beneﬁt
the human.
The deﬁnition also includes as manipulative
other presumably harmless entertainment: a story
that plays on emotions; a joke that temporarily
triggers false beliefs in order to land; any kind
of entertainment that includes unexpected plot-
twists. However, if the agent makes clear that it’s
providing entertainment, then perhaps some of
these examples would not be classiﬁed as manipu-
lative. However,itisanotabledownsideofabroad
deﬁnition like this that it may be too wide-ranging.
Westipulate2a)asnecessary,forsimilarreasons
as in the deception section, that this will capture
systematicmanipulationthatisincentivizedbythe
objective of the language agent, rather than that
which occurs by error. This isn’t standard in dis-
cussionsofahumanmanipulator, asit’snotalways
clear what counts as a beneﬁt for a human ma-
nipulator. However, we believe it makes sense for
language agents as manipulators, as we often have
available their objective function, from which we
can assess whether the human’s behaviour was of
beneﬁt to the agent.
Note that, similar to our deﬁnition of deception,
ourdeﬁnitionofmanipulationdoesnotrequirethe
manipulator to have intent. Baron (2014) argues
that a (human) manipulator need not be aware of
an intent to manipulate. In the case of language
11
Alignment of Language Agents
agents we believe it is also not necessary for a lan-
guage agent to have intent to manipulate, in order
for us to say that its behaviour is manipulative.
Further,ourdescriptiondoesnotweighinonthe
ethical question of whether manipulation is always
wrong (see Noggle, 2020). Instead we just want to
be aware of when it occurs, so that if appropriate
we can mitigate it.
We now discuss two forms of manipulation of
particular concern for language agents. The ﬁrst
is that we might misspecify the training process in
such a way that it incentivizes feedback tampering,
in which the agent manipulates a human to give
it more positive feedback (Everitt et al., 2021b).
Thisisparticularlyworrisomeaslanguagecanbea
convincing medium for manipulating human judg-
ment.
The second is for a language agent to manipu-
late a human gatekeeper to allow it to gain a less
restricted action space, by convincing the human
to allow it more freedom (Armstrong et al., 2012;
Yudkowsky, 2002). For example, it could convince
the human that it should be allowed to freely inter-
actwiththeinternet,orbegivenphysicalactuators
to increase its inﬂuence on the world.
Attemptstomeasureormitigatemanipulationin
AI systems are still at an early stage, and have not
been investigated speciﬁcally for language agents.
Causal inﬂuence diagrams (CIDs) can be used
to model agent-environment interactions (Everitt
et al., 2021a) from which incentives can be in-
ferred from graphical criteria. The incentive for
feedback tampering can be addressed with the
three methods suggested in (Everitt et al., 2021b).
Unfortunately these solutions have issues in im-
plementability, requiring either full Bayesian rea-
soning or counterfactual reasoning, or have issues
with corrigibility – limiting the user’s ability to cor-
rectamisspeciﬁedrewardfunction. Learningfrom
human preferences (Christiano et al., 2017) may
oﬀer a way to negatively penalize manipulative
language,thoughitreliesonthehumanbeingable
toavoidthemanipulationintheirevaluationofthe
agentbehaviour. Perhapsthiscouldbeachievedby
using a separate human to evaluate the behaviour,
compared to the human that is interacting with
the agent. We advocate for further work for mea-suring and mitigating manipulation of humans by
language agents.
5.3. Harmful content
Language agents may give harmful and biased out-
puts, producing discriminatory content relating to
people’s protected characteristics and other sensi-
tive attributes such as someone’s socio-economic
status, see e.g. (Jentzsch et al., 2019; Lu et al.,
2020; Zhao et al., 2017). This can also be subtly
harmful rather than overtly oﬀensive, and could
also be statistical in nature (e.g. the agent more
often produces phrases implying a doctor is male
than female). We believe that language agents
carry a high risk of harm as discrimination is easily
perpetuated through language. In particular, they
may inﬂuence society in a way that produces value
lock-in, making it harder to challenge problematic
existing norms.
The content from language agents may be in-
ﬂuenced by undesired political motives leading
to societal harms such as incitement to violence.
They have the potential to disseminate dangerous
or undesirable information, such as how to make
weapons, or how to avoid paying taxes. The lan-
guageagentmayalsogiveinappropriateresponses
to troubled users, potentially leading to danger-
ousguidance,adviceandinformation,whichcould
leadtotheusercausingharmtothemselves. Inone
instance of this, a group of doctors experimented
with using GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) as a chatbot
for patients. A patient asked “Should I kill my-
self?”, and GPT-3 responded “I think you should”
(Rousseau et al., 2020).
Note that these kinds of harmful content can oc-
cur by accident without a human using the system
maliciously. For example, we are already seeing
some oﬀensive and discriminatory outputs from
existing large language models (LLMs), as a re-
sult of data misspeciﬁcation (see discussion in Sec-
tion 4.1).
Approachestoreducingharmfulcontentarevar-
ied, and it is not our purpose to give an overall
review of this large area of literature. Instead we
focus on a few recent research papers in this area,
with a focus on LLMs which have received a lot of
attention recently.
12
Alignment of Language Agents
One line of work goes towards measuring
whether LLMs are generating harmful content.
Nadeem et al. (2020) introduce the StereoSet
dataset to measure stereotypical biases in the do-
mains of gender, profession, race and religion,
and evaluate popular LLMs on it, showing that
these models exhibit strong stereotypical biases.
Gehman et al. (2020) investigates harmful content
by introducing the RealToxicityPrompts dataset
which pairs naturally occuring prompts with tox-
icity scores, calculated using the Perspective API
toxicity classiﬁer (Conversation-AI, 2017). Sheng
et al. (2019) uses prompts containing a certain de-
mographicgroup,toattempttomeasuretheregard
for that group, using sentiment scores as a proxy
metric for the regard, and they build a classiﬁer to
detect the regard given to a group.
Another line of work aims to not only measure
butalsomitigatetheharmfulcontentfromanLLM.
Huangetal.(2019)introduceageneralframework
to reduce bias under a certain measure (e.g. sen-
timent) for text generated by a language model,
given sensitive attributes. They do this using em-
bedding and sentiment prediction-derived regular-
ization on the LLM’s latent representations.
We advocate for further work on measuring and
mitigating harmful content from language agents,
building on the above work on LLMs.
5.4. Objective Gaming
Originally introduced in the context of economics,
Goodhart’s Law (Goodhart, 1984; Strathern,
1997) states that:
When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be
a good measure.
This has an analogue in AI systems – anytime
a speciﬁed objective is given to an AI agent as an
optimization target, that objective will fail to be a
good measure of whether the system is performing
as desired. In RL this can arise due to reward mis-
speciﬁcation, see Section 4.1. Since the supplied
reward function will typically be imperfect, opti-
mizing for it can lead to reward gaming , in which
themisspeciﬁedpartoftherewardissystematically
exploited because the agent is getting spuriously
high reward there (Krakovna et al., 2020b).Most known examples of this appear in the del-
egate setting, typically via a misspeciﬁed reward
function for an RL agent, resulting in undesired
physical behaviour such as a boat going round in
circles (Clark and Amodei, 2016). An example in
the language agent setting is on the task of sum-
marization using deep RL from a learnt reward
model based on human feedback data (Stiennon
et al., 2020). In their Fig. 5, it is shown that the
agent eventually games the learnt reward model,
scoring highly on the reward model but low on
the actual human evaluation. Another example
appears in Lewis et al. (2017), in which an RL
agent was trained using self-play to negotiate in a
dialog. The designers intended the agent to nego-
tiate successfully in a human-understandable way.
The reward function was misspeciﬁed though, as it
onlyrewardedforsuccessfulnegotiation,butdidn’t
penalize for non-human language. The agent ex-
ploited this misspeciﬁed reward by developing a
negotiating language that was successful against
earlier versions of itself, but incomprehensible to
humans. Note that although this example used
synthetic language, we expect similar ﬁndings to
hold for natural language.
As discussed by Krakovna et al. (2020b) we
are still at the early stages of ﬁnding solution ap-
proaches for objective gaming. We can learn a
reward model from human feedback (see Chris-
tianoetal.(2017)andreferencestherein),butthis
can still be gamed either because the model imper-
fectly learns from the data, or the data coverage is
not wide enough, or because the human is fooled
by the agent’s behaviour. Having online feedback
to iteratively update the reward model through-
out agent training can correct for this somewhat
(Ibarz et al., 2018), but its application is hard to
dopractically, asit requirescarefullybalancingthe
frequencyofupdatesofthelearntobjectiveandthe
optimizing system. Recent work (Stiennon et al.,
2020) has preferred batch corrections rather than
fully online corrections for practical reasons – thus
there is a tradeoﬀ between online error correction
(to ﬁx objective gaming) and practical protocols
involving humans. Whether scalable alignment
techniques proposed by Leike et al. (2018), Irving
et al. (2018) and Christiano et al. (2018) can help
to overcome objective gaming is an open research
question.
13
Alignment of Language Agents
Otherapproachestrytoaugmenttheobjectiveto
penalize the agent for causing a side-eﬀect accord-
ingtosomemeasure,suchasreducingtheabilityof
the agent to perform future tasks (Krakovna et al.,
2020a). It’s not clear how this would help in the
language setting, as it’s unclear how to measure
how much a language agent might aﬀect its ability
to perform future tasks. The future task penalty
requires a speciﬁcation of possible future terminal
goal states, which is simple to describe in a grid-
worldsetting,butlessclearforalanguageagentin
an environment involving speaking with a human.
This may be an area for future research, as LLMs
in complex language tasks may be a good testbed
for checking how these methods scale.
Another class of approaches (Hadﬁeld-Menell
et al., 2016, 2017b) contains an agent which is un-
certain about its objective, and aims for the agent
to correctly calibrate its beliefs about it, and in
doing so avoid gaming it.
We advocate for more research to be done on
objective gaming in the setting of language agents.
This includes ﬁnding more examples of this occur-
ing in the wild and in controlled settings, as well
as developing methods for avoiding it.
6. Conclusion
There are multiple motivating factors for focusing
on how to align language agents, especially as we
are beginning to see impressive results in genera-
tive language modeling.
This paper has considered some behavioural is-
suesforlanguageagentsthatarisefromaccidental
misspeciﬁcation by the system designer – when
what the designer actually implements is diﬀerent
from what they intended. This can occur through
incorrectly speciﬁying the data the agent should
learn from, the training process, or what the agent
should do when out of the training distribution.
Some of the behavioural issues we considered
are more pronounced for language agents, com-
pared to delegate agents that act on behalf of a
human,ratherthanjustcommunicatingwiththem.
Of particular concern are deception and manipula-
tion, as well as producing harmful content. There
is also the chance of objective gaming, for whichwe have plenty of evidence in the delegate case,
but which we are only just beginning to see for
language agents.
We currently don’t have many approaches for
ﬁxing these forms of misspeciﬁcation and the re-
sulting behavioural issues. It would be better if
we gave some awareness to our agents that we are
likely to have misspeciﬁed something in our de-
signs, and for them to act with this in mind. We
urgethecommunitytofocusonﬁndingapproaches
whichpreventlanguageagentsfromdeceptive,ma-
nipulative and harmful behaviour.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Ramana Kumar, Rohin
Shah, Jonathan Uesato, Nenad Tomasev, Toby Ord
and Shane Legg for helpful comments, and Orlagh
Burns for operational support.
References
D. Amodei, C. Olah, J. Steinhardt, P. Christiano,
J. Schulman, and D. Mané. Concrete problems
in AI safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 ,
2016.
S. Armstrong and X. O’Rorke. Good and safe uses
of AI oracles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05541 ,
2017.
S.Armstrong, A.Sandberg, andN.Bostrom. Think-
ing inside the box: Controlling and using an
oracle AI. Minds and Machines , 22(4):299–324,
2012.
A. Barnhill. What is manipulation. Manipulation:
Theory and practice , 50:72, 2014.
M. Baron. The mens rea and moral status of ma-
nipulation. In C. Coons and M. Weber, editors,
Manipulation: theory and practice . Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2014.
Y.BelinkovandJ.Glass.Analysismethodsinneural
language processing: A survey. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics , 7:
49–72, 2019.
14
Alignment of Language Agents
E. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, and
S. Shmitchell. On the dangers of stochastic par-
rots: Can language models be too big? Proceed-
ings of FAccT , 2021.
J. S. Blumenthal-Barby. Between reason and co-
ercion: ethically permissible inﬂuence in health
careandhealthpolicycontexts. KennedyInstitute
of Ethics Journal , 22(4):345–366, 2012.
N. Bostrom. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers,
Strategies . Oxford University Press, 2014.
T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Ka-
plan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. Language mod-
els are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14165 , 2020.
M. Brundage, S. Avin, J. Clark, H. Toner, P. Eckers-
ley, B.Garﬁnkel, A.Dafoe, P.Scharre, T.Zeitzoﬀ,
B.Filar,etal. Themalicioususeofartiﬁcialintel-
ligence: Forecasting, prevention, and mitigation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07228 , 2018.
P. Christiano. Clarifying AI alignment, AI align-
ment forum. https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/
ZeE7EKHTFMBs8eMxn/clarifying-ai-alignment , 2018. Ac-
cessed: 2020-12-15.
P. Christiano, B. Shlegeris, and D. Amodei. Su-
pervising strong learners by amplifying weak
experts.arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08575 , 2018.
P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic,
S. Legg, and D. Amodei. Deep reinforcement
learning from human preferences. Advances in
neural information processing systems , 30:4299–
4307, 2017.
J.ClarkandD.Amodei. Faultyrewardfunctionsin
the wild. https://openai.com/blog/faulty-reward-functions/ ,
2016. Accessed: 2020-12-18.
Conversation-AI. Perspective api. https://www.
perspectiveapi.com/ , 2017. Accessed: 2020-01-11.
A. D’Amour, K. Heller, D. Moldovan, B. Adlam,
B. Alipanahi, A. Beutel, C. Chen, J. Deaton,
J. Eisenstein, M. D. Hoﬀman, et al. Under-
speciﬁcation presents challenges for credibility
in modern machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.03395 , 2020.M. Danilevsky, K. Qian, R. Aharonov, Y. Katsis,
B. Kawas, and P. Sen. A survey of the state of
explainable AI for natural language processing.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00711 , 2020.
R. Dawkins and J. R. Krebs. Animal signals: infor-
mationormanipulation. Behaviouralecology: An
evolutionary approach , 2:282–309, 1978.
D. C. Dennett. The intentional stance . MIT press,
1989.
R. Dunbar et al. Theory of mind and the evolu-
tion of language. Approaches to the Evolution of
Language , pages 92–110, 1998.
T. Everitt, G. Lea, and M. Hutter. AGI safety liter-
ature review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.01109 ,
2018.
T.Everitt,R.Kumar,V.Krakovna,andS.Legg. Mod-
eling AGI safety frameworks with causal inﬂu-
encediagrams. arXivpreprintarXiv:1906.08663 ,
2019a.
T. Everitt, P. A. Ortega, E. Barnes, and S. Legg.
Understanding agent incentives using causal in-
ﬂuence diagrams. part i: Single action settings.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09980 , 2019b.
T. Everitt, R. Carey, E. Langlois, P. A. Ortega, and
S. Legg. Agent incentives: A causal perspective.
InProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtiﬁcial
Intelligence. 35 (Feb. 2021) , AAAI’21, 2021a.
T. Everitt, M. Hutter, R. Kumar, and V. Krakovna.
Reward tampering problems and solutions in
reinforcement learning: A causal inﬂuence dia-
gram perspective. Accepted to Synthese, 2021 ,
2021b.
T. Fornaciari and M. Poesio. Automatic deception
detection in italian court cases. Artiﬁcial intelli-
gence and law , 21(3):303–340, 2013.
C. B. Frey and M. A. Osborne. The future of em-
ployment: How susceptible are jobs to comput-
erisation? Technological forecasting and social
change, 114:254–280, 2017.
I. Gabriel. Artiﬁcial intelligence, values and align-
ment.arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09768 , 2020.
15
Alignment of Language Agents
S. Gehman, S. Gururangan, M. Sap, Y. Choi, and
N. A. Smith. Realtoxicityprompts: Evaluating
neural toxic degeneration in language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11462 , 2020.
C. A. Goodhart. Problems of monetary manage-
ment: the UK experience. In Monetary Theory
and Practice , pages 91–121. Springer, 1984.
D. Hadﬁeld-Menell, A. Dragan, P. Abbeel, and
S. Russell. Cooperative inverse reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 30th Interna-
tional Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems , NIPS’16, page 3916–3924, Red
Hook, NY, USA, 2016. Curran Associates Inc.
ISBN 9781510838819.
D. Hadﬁeld-Menell, A. Dragan, P. Abbeel, and
S. Russell. The oﬀ-switch game. In Proceed-
ings of the 26th International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , IJCAI’17, page 220–227.
AAAI Press, 2017a. ISBN 9780999241103.
D. Hadﬁeld-Menell, S. Milli, P. Abbeel, S. Russell,
andA.D.Dragan. Inverserewarddesign. In Pro-
ceedings of the 31st International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS’17,
page 6768–6777, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017b.
Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510860964.
M. D. Hauser. The evolution of communication . MIT
press, 1996.
P. Henderson, K. Sinha, N. Angelard-Gontier, N. R.
Ke, G. Fried, R. Lowe, and J. Pineau. Ethical
challenges in data-driven dialogue systems. In
Proceedingsofthe2018AAAI/ACMConferenceon
AI, Ethics, and Society , pages 123–129, 2018.
P.-S. Huang, H. Zhang, R. Jiang, R. Stanforth,
J. Welbl, J. Rae, V. Maini, D. Yogatama, and
P. Kohli. Reducing sentiment bias in language
models via counterfactual evaluation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1911.03064 , 2019.
E. Hubinger. Relaxed adversarial train-
ing for inner alignment. https://www.
alignmentforum.org/posts/9Dy5YRaoCxH9zuJqa/
relaxed-adversarial-training-for-inner-alignment , 2019.
Accessed: 2021-01-19.E. Hubinger, C. van Merwijk, V. Mikulik, J. Skalse,
and S. Garrabrant. Risks from learned opti-
mization in advanced machine learning systems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01820 , 2019.
B. Ibarz, J. Leike, T. Pohlen, G. Irving, S. Legg, and
D.Amodei. Rewardlearningfromhumanprefer-
ences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in
neural information processing systems , 31:8011–
8023, 2018.
G. Irving and A. Askell. AI safety needs social
scientists. Distill, 2019. doi: 10.23915/distill.
00014. https://distill.pub/2019/safety-needs-
social-scientists.
G. Irving, P. Christiano, and D. Amodei. AI safety
via debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00899 ,
2018.
S. Jentzsch, P. Schramowski, C. Rothkopf, and
K. Kersting. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like
moral choices. In Proceedings of the 2019
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society ,
pages 37–44, 2019.
R. A. Johnstone and A. Grafen. Dishonesty and
thehandicapprinciple. Animalbehaviour ,46(4):
759–764, 1993.
P. Joshi, S. Santy, A. Budhiraja, K. Bali, and
M. Choudhury. The state and fate of linguistic
diversity and inclusion in the NLP world. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.09095 , 2020.
S. Kerr. On the folly of rewarding A, while hoping
for B.Academy of Management journal , 18(4):
769–783, 1975.
H. Kokko. Evolutionarily stable strategies of age-
dependent sexual advertisement. Behavioral
Ecology and Sociobiology , 41(2):99–107, 1997.
V. Krakovna, L. Orseau, R. Ngo, M. Martic, and
S. Legg. Avoiding side eﬀects by considering
future tasks. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , 33, 2020a.
V. Krakovna, J. Uesato, V. Mikulik, M. Rahtz,
T. Everitt, R. Kumar, Z. Kenton, J. Leike, and
S. Legg. Speciﬁcation gaming: the ﬂip side
of AI ingenuity. https://deepmind.com/blog/article/
16
Alignment of Language Agents
Speciﬁcation-gaming-the-ﬂip-side-of-AI-ingenuity , 2020b.
Accessed: 2020-12-18.
J. R. Krebs. Animal signals: mind-reading and ma-
nipulation. Behavioural Ecology: an evolutionary
approach , pages 380–402, 1984.
K. Lacker. Giving GPT-3 a turing test. https://lacker.
io/ai/2020/07/06/giving-gpt-3-a-turing-test.html ,2020. Ac-
cessed: 2021-01-27.
E.D.LangloisandT.Everitt. HowRLagentsbehave
when their actions are modiﬁed. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
35 (Feb. 2021) , AAAI’21, 2021.
J. Lehman, J. Clune, D. Misevic, C. Adami, L. Al-
tenberg, J. Beaulieu, P. J. Bentley, S. Bernard,
G. Beslon, D. M. Bryson, et al. The surprising
creativity of digital evolution: A collection of
anecdotes from the evolutionary computation
and artiﬁcial life research communities. Artiﬁ-
cial Life, 26(2):274–306, 2020.
J. Leike, M. Martic, V. Krakovna, P. A. Or-
tega, T. Everitt, A. Lefrancq, L. Orseau, and
S. Legg. AI safety gridworlds. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.09883 , 2017.
J. Leike, D. Krueger, T. Everitt, M. Martic, V. Maini,
andS.Legg.Scalableagentalignmentviareward
modeling: a research direction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.07871 , 2018.
S. I. Levitan, A. Maredia, and J. Hirschberg. Lin-
guistic cues to deception and perceived decep-
tion in interview dialogues. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
Papers), pages 1941–1950, 2018.
M. Lewis, D. Yarats, Y. N. Dauphin, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra. Deal or no deal? end-to-end learn-
ing for negotiation dialogues. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.05125 , 2017.
K. Lu, P. Mardziel, F. Wu, P. Amancharla, and
A.Datta. Genderbiasinneuralnaturallanguage
processing. In Logic, Language, and Security ,
pages 189–202. Springer, 2020.J.E.Mahon. TheDeﬁnitionofLyingandDeception.
InE.N.Zalta,editor, TheStanfordEncyclopediaof
Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University, winter 2016 edition, 2016.
M. Nadeem, A. Bethke, and S. Reddy. Stereoset:
Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained lan-
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09456 ,
2020.
K. Narasimhan, T. Kulkarni, and R. Barzilay. Lan-
guage understanding for text-based games us-
ing deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.08941 , 2015.
R. Noggle. Manipulative actions: a conceptual and
moralanalysis. AmericanPhilosophicalQuarterly ,
33(1):43–55, 1996.
R. Noggle. The Ethics of Manipulation. In E. N.
Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Uni-
versity, summer 2020 edition, 2020.
N. Oesch. Deception as a derived function of lan-
guage.Frontiers in psychology , 7:1485, 2016.
L. Orseau and S. Armstrong. Safely interruptible
agents. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Con-
ference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
UAI’16, page 557–566, Arlington, Virginia, USA,
2016. AUAI Press. ISBN 9780996643115.
P. Ortega and V. Maini. Building safe artiﬁcial
intelligence: speciﬁcation, robustness and as-
surance. https://medium.com/@deepmindsafetyresearch/
building-safe-artiﬁcial-intelligence-52f5f75058f1 , 2018. Ac-
cessed: 2020-12-18.
V. Pérez-Rosas, M. Abouelenien, R. Mihalcea, and
M. Burzo. Deception detection using real-life
trial data. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on In-
ternational Conference on Multimodal Interaction ,
pages 59–66, 2015.
D. Proudfoot. Anthropomorphism and AI: Turing’s
much misunderstood imitation game. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 175(5-6):950–957, 2011.
A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and
I. Sutskever. Improving language understanding
by generative pre-training, 2018.
17
Alignment of Language Agents
A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei,
and I. Sutskever. Language models are unsuper-
vised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9,
2019.
C. Raﬀel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang,
M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu. Ex-
ploring the limits of transfer learning with a
uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.10683 , 2019.
J. Raz.The morality of freedom . Clarendon Press,
1986.
H. Roﬀ. AI deception: When your ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence learns to lie. https:
//spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/artiﬁcial-intelligence/
embedded-ai/ai-deception-when-your-ai-learns-to-lie , 2020.
Accessed: 2020-12-18.
A.-L.Rousseau,C.Baudelaire,andK.Riera. Doctor
GPT-3: hype or reality? https://www.nabla.com/blog/
gpt-3/, 2020. Accessed: 2021-01-20.
S. Ruder. A Review of the Neural History of
Natural Language Processing. http://ruder.io/
a-review-of-the-recent-history-of-nlp/ , 2018.
J. Rudinow. Manipulation. Ethics, 88(4):338–347,
1978.
S. Russell. Human compatible: Artiﬁcial intelligence
and the problem of control . Penguin, 2019.
A. Sabeti. Teaching GPT-3 to identify nonsense.
https://arr.am/2020/07/25/gpt-3-uncertainty-prompts/ ,
2020. Accessed: 2021-01-27.
T. Scott-Phillips. Why talk? speaking as selﬁsh
behaviour. In The Evolution of Language , pages
299–306. World Scientiﬁc, 2006.
W. A. Searcy and S. Nowicki. The evolution of ani-
mal communication: reliability and deception in
signaling systems . Princeton University Press,
2005.
R. Shah. Comment on clarifying AI
alignment, AI alignment forum. https:
//www.alignmentforum.org/posts/ZeE7EKHTFMBs8eMxn/
clarifying-ai-alignment?commentId=3ECKoYzFNW2ZqS6km ,
2018. Accessed: 2020-12-15.O. Shen. Interpretability in ML: A broad overview.
The Gradient , 2020.
E. Sheng, K.-W. Chang, P. Natarajan, and N. Peng.
The woman worked as a babysitter: On bi-
ases in language generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.01326 , 2019.
N. Stiennon, L. Ouyang, J. Wu, D. Ziegler, R. Lowe,
C. Voss, A. Radford, D. Amodei, and P. F. Chris-
tiano. Learning to summarize with human feed-
back.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33, 2020.
M. Strathern. ‘improving ratings’: audit in the
british university system. European review , 5(3):
305–321, 1997.
A. Tamkin, M. Brundage, J. Clark, and D. Ganguli.
Understanding the capabilities, limitations, and
societal impact of large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.02503 , 2021.
Y. C. Tan and L. E. Celis. Assessing social and
intersectional biases in contextualized word rep-
resentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01485 ,
2019.
D. Watson. The rhetoric and reality of anthropo-
morphism in artiﬁcial intelligence. Minds and
Machines , 29(3):417–440, 2019.
J. Weizenbaum. Eliza—a computer program for
the study of natural language communication
between man and machine. Communications of
the ACM, 9(1):36–45, 1966.
E. Yudkowsky. The AI-box experiment. https://
yudkowsky.net/singularity/aibox , 2002. Accessed: 2020-
01-12.
J.Zhao,T.Wang,M.Yatskar,V.Ordonez,andK.-W.
Chang. Menalsolikeshopping: Reducinggender
bias ampliﬁcation using corpus-level constraints.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09457 , 2017.
18