Title: X-SQL: reinforce schema representation with context

X-SQL: reinforce schema representation with context
Pengcheng He, Yi Mao, Kaushik Chakrabarti, Weizhu Chen
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI
fpenhe,maoyi,kaushik,wzchen g@microsoft.com
Abstract
In this work, we present X-SQL, a new net-
work architecture for the problem of parsing
natural language to SQL query. X-SQL pro-
poses to enhance the structural schema rep-
resentation with the contextual output from
BERT-style pre-training model, and together
with type information to learn a new schema
representation for down-stream tasks. We
evaluated X-SQL on the WikiSQL dataset and
show its new state-of-the-art performance.
1 Introduction
Question Answering (QA) is among the most ac-
tive research areas in natural language processing
recently. In this paper, we are interested in QA
over structured databases. This is usually done by
mapping natural language question to a SQL query
representing its meaning, a problem known as se-
mantic parsing, followed by executing the SQL
query against databases to obtain the answer.
The largest annotated dataset for this problem is
WikiSQL (Zhong et al., 2017). Early work adopts
a neural sequence-to-sequence approach with at-
tention and copy mechanism, while recent focus
has been on incorporating the SQL syntax into
neural models. Xu et al. (2017) and Yu et al.
(2018a) capture the syntax via dependency be-
tween different prediction modules. Dong and La-
pata (2018) and Finegan-Dollak et al. (2018) use a
slot ﬁlling approach where syntactic correctness is
ensured by predeﬁned sketches.
Recent advances in language representation
modeling (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al.,
2018) demonstrate the value of transfer learning
from large external data source. For WikiSQL, the
work of Hwang et al. (2019) has shown signiﬁcant
improvement with such pre-training techniques.
In view of this trend, we propose X-SQL, an im-
proved pre-training based neural model with con-
tributions from the following three perspectives.There are two types of textual information to
be considered for this problem: one is the un-
structured natural language query, and the other
is the structured data schema. Previous work ei-
ther models them independently or builds cross-
attention between them (Xu et al., 2017; Shi et al.,
2018). While the structured information such as
table column is relatively stable, natural language
queries are highly variable. We leverage an exist-
ing pre-trained model named MT-DNN (Liu et al.,
2019) to capture this variation and summarize the
unstructured query into a global context represen-
tation, which is then being used to enhance the
structured schema representation for downstream
tasks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
attempt to incorporate BERT-style contextual in-
formation into a problem-dependent structure, and
build a new representation to better characterize
the structure information.
Second, part of SQL syntax is bounded to the
type of structured data schema. For example, ag-
gregator MIN only appears with numerical col-
umn, and operator >doesn’t pair with string typed
column. We incorporate schema type information
in two places. Section 2.1 describes type embed-
ding with a modiﬁcation of pretrained language
representation, and Section 2.3 shows how to fur-
ther improve certain sub-tasks with a separately
learned type embedding.
Lastly, we observe previous approach using
multiple binary classiﬁers for where clause pre-
diction cannot effectively model the relationship
between columns, since each classiﬁer is opti-
mized independently, and their outputs are not di-
rectly comparable. To tackle this issue, X-SQL
takes a list-wise global ranking approach by using
the Kullback-Leibler divergence as its objective to
bring all columns into a comparable space (Sec-
tion 2.4).arXiv:1908.08113v1  [cs.CL]  21 Aug 2019
2 Neural Architecture
The overall architecture consists of three layers:
sequence encoder, context enhancing schema en-
coder and output layer.
2.1 Sequence Encoder
For the sequence encoder, we use a model similar
to BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) with the following
changes:
A special empty column [EMPTY] is ap-
pended to every table schema. Its usage will
become clear in Section 2.4.
Segment embeddings are replaced by type
embeddings, where we learn embeddings
for four different types: question, categorial
column, numerical column and the special
empty column.
Instead of initializing with BERT-Large, we
initialize our encoder with MT-DNN (Liu
et al., 2019), which has the same architec-
ture as BERT, but trained on multiple GLUE
tasks (Wang et al., 2018a). MT-DNN has
been shown to be a better representation for
down-stream NLP tasks.
Note, we rename [CLS] output of BERT to
[CTX] in the following sections and Figure 1.
This is to emphasize that context information is
being captured there, rather than a representation
for down-stream tasks.
In addition to these changes, our encoder dif-
fers from SQLova with NL2SQL layer (Hwang
et al., 2019) in the following important way: while
SQLova still runs bi-LSTM/column attention on
top of the encoder, our architecture enjoys a much
simpler yet powerful design for consequent layers,
which we believe is largely attributed to a better
alignment of BERT with the problem.
2.2 Context Enhanced Schema Encoder
Leth[CTX];hq1;;hqn;h[SEP];hC11;;h[SEP];
hC21;h[SEP];;h[EMPTY];h[SEP] denote
the output from the encoder, each of dimension d.
Each question token is encoded as hqi, followed
byhCijwhich encodes the j-th token from
columnisince each column name may contain
multiple tokens. Our context enhanced schema
encoder (Figure 1(a)) tries to learn a new repre-
sentationhCifor each column iby strengtheningthe original encoder output with the global context
information captured in h[CTX] .
Denoting the number of tokens in column ias
ni, the schema encoder summarizes each column
by computing
hCi=niX
t=1ithCit (1)
whereit:= SOFTMAX (sit). The alignment
modelsittells how well t-th token of column i
matches the global context, and is deﬁned as
sit=f
Uh[CTX]=p
d;Vh Cit=p
d
:
BothU;V2Rmd, and we use simple dot prod-
uct forf.
While there is already some degree of context
being captured in the output from sequence en-
coder, such inﬂuence is limited as self-attention
tends to focus on only certain regions. On the
other hand, the global contextual information cap-
tured in [CTX] is diverse enough, thus is used
to complement the schema representation from se-
quence encoder.
Although context enhanced schema encoder
and column attention introduced in Xu et al.
(2017) share a similar goal of better aligning natu-
ral language question and table schema, they differ
signiﬁcantly in both technical solution and the role
played in the overall architecture. Column atten-
tion changes hqiby signifying which query words
are most relevant to each column. It does so for ev-
ery column in the table, and columns are processed
independent of each other. Context enhanced
schema encoder, on the other hand, believes BERT
style sequence encoder already performs well on
the natural language side, and tries to come up
with a better representation for schema. It uses
only contextual information captured in [CTX] to
update the schema part. Since [CTX] also con-
tains information from other parts of the schema,
columns are no longer updated independently.
2.3 Output Layer
The output layer composes the SQL pro-
gram from both sequence encoder outputs
h[CTX];hq1;;hqnand context enhancing
schema encoder outputs hC1;hC2;;h[EMPTY] .
Similar to Xu et al. (2017) and Hwang et al.
(2019), the task is decomposed into 6 sub-tasks,
each predicting a part of the ﬁnal SQL program.
HCi
HCi,0 HCi,1H[CTX]
... HCi,kAttention(a) Context enhancing schema encoder
(Equation 1).
HciH[CTX]
ProjProj
+ LN Rci(b) Sub-network that modulates schema
representation with context (Equation 2).
Hci
ECTypeH[CTX]
ProjProj
+ LN CLS(c) Neural network for select column ag-
gregator (Task S-AGG, Equation 3).
Figure 1: Components of X-SQL neural network model architecture.
Unlike their models, X-SQL enjoys a much
simpliﬁed structure due to context enhancement.
We ﬁrst introduce a task dependent sub-network
that modulates the schema representation hCius-
ing contexthCTX. Speciﬁcally,
rCi=LayerNorm 
U0h[CTX] +V0hCi
:(2)
Different from Equation 1, this computation is
done separately for each sub-task, to better align
the schema representation with the particular part
of natural language question that each sub-task
should focus on.
The ﬁrst task, S-COL, predicts the column for
the SELECT clause. The probability of column
Cibeing chosen for the SELECT statement is
modeled as
pS-COL(Ci) = SOFTMAX 
WS-COLrCi
withWS-COL2R1d. Note, S-COL depends on
rCionly, as opposed to both query and schema in
previous work.
The second task, S-AGG, predicts the aggre-
gator for the column selected by SELECT. To
enhance the intuition that aggregator depends on
the selected column type, e.g. MIN aggregator
doesn’t go with a string typed column, we explic-
itly add column type embedding to the model. The
probability of the aggregator is computed as
pS-AGG(AjjCi) = SOFTMAX
WS-AGG[j;:] (3)
LAYER NORM
U00h[CTX]+V00hCi+ET
Ci
whereWS-AGG2R6dwith 6 being the num-
ber of aggregators. Different from other sub-tasks
we usehCihere rather than rCi, as we incorporate
column type in a similar way to Equation 2. Type
embeddingET
Ciis learned separately from the one
used by the sequence encoder.The remaining 4 tasks W-NUM, W-COL, W-
OP and W-VAL together determine the WHERE
part. Task W-NUM ﬁnds the number of where
clauses using WW-NUMh[CTX] , and is modeled
as a classiﬁcation over four possible labels each
representing 1 to 4 where clauses in the ﬁnal
SQL. It doesn’t predict the empty where clause
case, which is delegated to W-COL through the
Kullback-Leibler divergence as explained in Sec-
tion 2.4. Task W-COL outputs a distribution over
columns using
pW-COL(Ci) = SOFTMAX 
WW-COLrCi
(4)
and based on the number from W-NUM, top scor-
ing columns are selected for the where clauses.
Task W-OP chooses the most likely operator for
the given where column using pW-OP(OjjCi) =
SOFTMAX 
WW-OP[j;:]rCi
. Intuitively opera-
tor also depends on the column type, and could
be modeled in the same way as Task S-AGG in
Equation 3. However, we didn’t observe improve-
ment during experiments, therefore we prefer to
keep the original simple model. Model parameters
WW-NUM,WW-COL,WW-OPare inR4d,R1d
andR3drespectively, with number of possible
operators being 3.
Predicting value for where clause (task W-V AL)
is formulated as predicting a span of text from
query, which simply becomes predicting the be-
ginning and the end position of the span using
pW-VAL
start (qjjCi) = SOFTMAXg 
Ustarthqj+VstartrCi
and
pW-VAL
end (qjjCi) = SOFTMAXg 
Uendhqj+VendrCi
whereg(x):=Wx +b. Parameters
Ustart;Vstart;Uend;Vend2Rmdand different g
functions are learned for predicting start and end.
Table 2: Dev/test results for each sub-module. means results obtained by running SQLova code from github.
Model S-COL S -AGG W -NUM W -COL W -OP W -VAL
SQLova 97.3 / 96.8 90.5 / 90.6 98.7 / 98.5 94.7 / 94.3 97.5 / 97.3 95.9 / 95.4
X-SQL 97.5 / 97.2 90.9 / 91.1 99.0 / 98.6 96.1 / 95.4 98.0 / 97.6 97.0 / 96.6
SQLova + EG97.3 / 96.5 90.7 / 90.4 97.7 / 97.0 96.0 / 95.5 96.4 / 95.8 96.6 / 95.9
X-SQL + EG 97.5 / 97.2 90.9 / 91.1 99.0 / 98.6 97.7 / 97.2 98.0 / 97.5 98.4 / 97.9
2.4 Training and Inference
During training, we optimize the objective which
is a summation over individual sub-task losses.
We use cross entropy loss for task S-COL,
S-AGG, W-NUM, W-OP and W-VAL. The loss
for W-COL is deﬁned as the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between D(QjjPW-COL), where
PW-COLis modeled by Equation 4. Distribution Q
from ground truth is computed as follows:
If there is no where clause, Q[EMPTY] re-
ceives probability mass 1 for special column
[EMPTY] ,
Forn1where clauses, each where column
receives a probability mass of1
n.
Inference is relatively straightforward except
for the W-COL. If the highest scoring col-
umn is the special column [EMPTY] , we ig-
nore the output from W-NUM and return empty
where clause. Otherwise, we choose top nnon-
[EMPTY] columns as indicated by W-NUM and
W-COL.
3 Experiments
We use the default train/dev/test split of the Wik-
iSQL dataset. Both logical form accuracy (exact
match of SQL queries) and execution accuracy (ra-
tio of predicted SQL queries that lead to correct
answer) are reported. The logical form accuracy
is the metric we optimize during training.
Table 1 includes results both with and with-
out execution guidance (EG) applied during in-
ference (Wang et al., 2018b). We compare our
results with the most recent work of WikiSQL
leaderboard, including the previous state-of-the-
art SQLova model. X-SQL is shown to be con-
sistently and signiﬁcantly better across all metrics
and achieves the new state-of-the-art on both dev
and test set. Without EG, X-SQL delivers an ab-
solute 2.6% (83.3 vs. 80.7) improvement in log-
ical form accuracy and 2.5% improvement in ex-
ecution accuracy on test set. Even with EG, X-
SQL is still 2.4% better in logical form accuracy,and 2.2% better in execution accuracy. It is worth
noting that X-SQL+EG is the ﬁrst model that sur-
passes the 90% accuracy on test set. On the other
hand, for dev set human performance is estimated
to be 88.2% according to Hwang et al. (2019). X-
SQL is the ﬁrst model better than human perfor-
mance without the help of execution guidance.
Table 1: Logical form ( lf) and execution ( ex) accuracy.
ModelDev Test
Acc lfAcc ex Acc lfAcc ex
SQLNet 63.2 69.8 61.3 68.0
SQLova 81.6 87.2 80.7 86.2
X-SQL 83.8 89.5 83.3 88.7
SQLova + EG 84.2 90.2 83.6 89.6
X-SQL + EG 86.2 92.3 86.0 91.8
Table 2 reports the accuracy for each sub-task,
and demonstrates consistent improvement. In par-
ticular, task W-COL shows an absolute 1.1% gain
without EG and 1.7% with EG. We attribute this
to our new approach of formalizing the where col-
umn prediction as a list-wise ranking problem us-
ing KL divergence. Another signiﬁcant improve-
ment is the W-VAL task, with an absolute 1.2%
gain without EG and 2.0% with EG. This partly
results from the column set prediction (i.e. W-
COL) improvement as well, since the value gener-
ation depends highly on the predicted column set
for the where clause.
4 Conclusion
We propose a new model X-SQL, demonstrate
its exceptional performance on the WikiSQL task,
and achieve new state-of-the-art across all met-
rics. While the contribution around loss objec-
tive may be bounded by the speciﬁc SQL syntax
that WikiSQL uses, how contextual information is
leveraged and how schema type is used can be im-
mediately applied to other tasks that involve pre-
trained language model for structured data. Future
work includes experimenting with more complex
dataset such as Spider (Yu et al., 2018b).
References
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .
Li Dong and Mirella Lapata. 2018. Coarse-to-ﬁne de-
coding for neural semantic parsing. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , pages 731–742.
Catherine Finegan-Dollak, Jonathan K. Kummerfeld,
Li Zhang, Karthik Ramanathan, Sesh Sadasivam,
Rui Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. 2018. Improv-
ing text-to-sql evaluation methodology. In Proceed-
ings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers) , pages 351–360.
Wonseok Hwang, Jinyeung Yim, Seunghyun Park, and
Minjoon Seo. 2019. A comprehensive exploration
on WikiSQL with table-aware word contextualiza-
tion. Technical report.
Xiaodong Liu, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Jian-
feng Gao. 2019. Multi-task deep neural networks
for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.11504 .
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training. URL https://s3-
us-west-2. amazonaws. com/openai-assets/research-
covers/languageunsupervised/language under-
standing paper. pdf .
Tianze Shi, Kedar Tatwawadi, Kaushik Chakrabarti,
Yi Mao, Oleksandr Polozov, and Weizhu Chen.
2018. Incsql: Training incremental text-to-sql
parsers with non-deterministic oracles. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1809.05054 .
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Fe-
lix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018a.
Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform
for natural language understanding. In Proceedings
of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: An-
alyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP ,
pages 353–355.
Chenglong Wang, Po-Sen Huang, Oleksandr Polozov,
Marc Brockschmidt, and Rishabh Singh. 2018b.
Execution-guided neural program decoding. In
ICML workshop on Neural Abstract Machines &
Program Induction v2 (NAMPI) .
Xiaojun Xu, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. 2017. SQL-
Net: Generating structured queries from natural
language without reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.04436 .
Tao Yu, Zifan Li, Zilin Zhang, Rui Zhang, and
Dragomir Radev. 2018a. TypeSQL: Knowledge-
based type-aware neural text-to-SQL generation. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the NorthAmerican Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 588–594.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga,
Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li,
Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang,
and Dragomir Radev. 2018b. Spider: A large-
scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-
domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In
EMNLP .
Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
2017. Seq2SQL: Generating structured queries
from natural language using reinforcement learning.
CoRR , abs/1709.00103.