Title: GeDi: Generative Discriminator Guided Sequence Generation

GEDI: GENERATIVE DISCRIMINATOR GUIDED
SEQUENCE GENERATION
Ben Krause, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Bryan McCanny, Nitish Shirish Keskar
Shaﬁq Joty, Richard Sochery, Nazneen Fatema Rajani
Salesforce Research
fbkrause,akhilesh.gotmare g@salesforce.com
ABSTRACT
While large-scale language models (LMs) are able to imitate the distribution of
natural language well enough to generate realistic text, it is difﬁcult to control
which regions of the distribution they generate. This is especially problematic
because datasets used for training large LMs usually contain signiﬁcant toxicity,
hate, bias, and negativity. We propose GeDi as an efﬁcient method for using
smaller LMs as generative discriminators to guide generation from large LMs to
make them safer and more controllable. GeDi guides generation at each step by
computing classiﬁcation probabilities for all possible next tokens via Bayes rule
by normalizing over two class-conditional distributions; one conditioned on the
desired attribute, or control code , and another conditioned on the undesired at-
tribute, or anti control code . We ﬁnd that GeDi gives stronger controllability than
the state of the art method while also achieving generation speeds more than 30
times faster. Additionally, training GeDi on only four topics allows us to control-
lably generate new topics zero-shot from just a keyword, unlocking a new capa-
bility that previous controllable generation methods do not have. Lastly, we show
that GeDi can make GPT-2 (1.5B parameters) signiﬁcantly less toxic without sac-
riﬁcing linguistic quality, making it by far the most practical existing method for
detoxifying large language models while maintaining a fast generation speed.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
Natural language generation has seen great progress with the advent of Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) and large scale training (Radford et al., 2017; 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020). Large language
models (LMs) like GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) are able to learn the
distribution of their training set well enough to generate realistic text. However, simply imitating the
distribution of the training data during generation has many drawbacks; large-scale text training sets
are crawled from the web which is imbued with toxicity, bias, hate, and misinformation. Methods
for better controlling or ﬁltering generation are valuable for making LMs trained on such data safer
and more generally useful for downstream applications.
Existing approaches to controlling LMs have limitations. Class-conditional LMs (CC-LMs) such
as CTRL (Keskar et al., 2019) attempt to control text generation by conditioning on a control code ,
which is an attribute variable representing a data source. However, CTRL is not as useful for con-
trolling what notto generate (i.e. toxicity). Furthermore, using a speciﬁc control code can reduce
sample diversity across prompts, as samples will generally resemble the data source of the control
code. Another approach is to use discriminators to steer generation, but existing methods to do this
are very computationally intensive. Weighted decoding (Holtzman et al., 2018) requires feeding
candidate next tokens into a discriminator, and thus scales linearly in computation with the number
of tokens to be re-weighted. Plug and Play LM (Dathathri et al., 2020, PPLM) applies up to 10
Equal Contribution
yWork performed while at Salesforce Research
1Code available at https://github.com/salesforce/GeDi , includes GeDi-guided GPT-3 generation using OpenAI API.
1arXiv:2009.06367v2  [cs.CL]  22 Oct 2020
updates to the generating LM’s latent states per time step using gradients from a discriminator, also
making it many times slower than generating from the LM directly.
We present GeDi2as an algorithm for efﬁciently guiding generation from large LMs to make them
safer and more controllable. Our proposed method uses CC-LMs as generative discriminators
(GeDis) to guide language generation towards desired attributes. The methods we develop include:
• GeDi-guided contrastive generation: We show how CC-LMs can be used as generative
discriminators to compute classiﬁcation likelihoods for all candidate next tokens during
generation using Bayes rule, saving many thousand-fold in computation as compared with
using a standard (non-generative) discriminator to compute this for large vocabulary sizes.
We then show how these likelihoods can guide generation from large language models via
weighted decoding and ﬁltering [Section 3.1].
• GeDi training: We train CC-LMs with a hybrid generative-discriminative loss to make them
better classiﬁers, making them more powerful discriminators for GeDi-guided contrastive
generation [Section 3.2].
Our experimental results verify the ability of GeDi to control generation in a variety of settings
while maintaining linguistic quality on par with strong language models. We apply GeDi (345M
parameters) to guide generation from the GPT2-XL model (1.5B parameters), and ﬁnd that:
• GeDi trained on sentiment of movie reviews can generate book text with a positive or
negative tone better than state of the art baselines [Section 5.1]. Guiding towards positivity
also has potential applications towards making LMs friendlier.
• GeDi is able to signiﬁcantly reduce the toxicity of GPT-2 generation [Section 5.2], without
sacriﬁcing linguistic quality as compared with generating from GPT-2 directly, suggesting
applications towards safer language modeling.
• GeDi trained on a dataset of only 4 topics can generalize to new control codes zero-shot
[Section 5.3], allowing them to guide generation towards a wide variety of topics.
• GeDi is very computationally efﬁcient for both training and inference. GeDi guided gen-
eration in our experiments is more than 30faster than applying PPLM with GPT2-XL
using default settings from Dathathri et al. (2020). Additionally, smaller GeDis ﬁne-tuned
for less than a day on a single GPU are effective and computationally efﬁcient for con-
trolling larger language models. This provides a cheap alternative to ﬁnetuning large LMs
directly (Ziegler et al., 2019).
2 B ACKGROUND
2.1 L ANGUAGE MODELING
Language models (LMs) rely on an auto-regressive factorization to perform density estimation and
generation of language data. Auto-regressive sequence models with parameters assign a probabil-
ity to a sequence x1:T=fx1;:::;xTgby factorizing it using the chain rule as follows:
P(x1:T) =TY
t=1P(xtjx<t): (1)
Models can assign probabilities to sequences by iteratively predicting a distribution over the next
token given the previous tokens. Generating from language models requires iteratively sampling
fromP(xtjx<t), and then feeding xtback into the model as input for the next step.
2.2 C LASS -CONDITIONAL LANGUAGE MODELING
Class-conditional language models (CC-LMs) such as CTRL (Keskar et al., 2019) are a way for lan-
guage models to generate while conditioning on an attribute variable. CC-LMs predict a probability
distribution P(x1:Tjc), wherecis a class variable or a “control code” that describes an attribute
2pronounced “Jedi”
2
okay0.050.2…0.010.090.20.05…0.090.01
0.50.5…0.10.9GPT-2pn-1pn…p2p1
partyThewaswaswaspartypartyTheThe<positive><negative><positive>desired attribute: positive
Figure 1: A toy example of how GeDi-guided generation uses Bayes rule to efﬁciently compute classiﬁcation
probabilities for possible next tokens at each generation timestep using only element-wise operations. These
classiﬁcation probabilities can then be used to guide generation from a language model (e.g., GPT-2) to achieve
attribute control across domains. If the GeDi was trained on movie reviews for sentiment control, its direct
class-conditional predictions will be biased towards predicting movie review words (illustrated by next word
prediction of “cinematic”). However, by contrasting the predictions of opposing control codes via Bayes rule,
the bias towards movie reviews can be canceled out.
of the text in x1:T, which could, for instance, describe sentiment or topic. The auto-regressive
factorization for a CC-LM is given by the following equation:
P(x1:Tjc) =TY
t=1P(xtjx<t;c): (2)
When training a CC-LM on a training set of sequences fx(1)
1:T1;:::;x(i)
1:Ti;:::;x(N)
1:TNg, each sequence
x(i)
1:Tis paired with a control code c(i), which is a label or category of the sequence. The LM is trained
to minimize the average negative log-likelihood, which we refer to as Lg.
Lg= 1
NNX
i=11
TiTiX
t=1logP(x(i)
tjx(i)
<t;c(i)): (3)
In addition to class-conditional generation, CC-LMs can be used as generative classiﬁers by applying
Bayes rule to compute P(cjx1:T), as is done by Keskar et al. (2019) for source attribution.
3 G EDI
3.1 G EDI-GUIDED CONTRASTIVE GENERATION
GeDi assumes we have a CC-LM with desired control code cand an undesired or anti-control code
c, and uses the contrast between P(x1:tjc)andP(x1:tjc)to guide sampling from an LM that gives
PLM(x1:t). Speciﬁcally, when predicting the next token during generation, GeDi uses this contrast
to compute the probability that every candidate next token xtbelongs to the desired class, given by
P(cjxt;x<t). Our key insight is that this distribution can be computed very efﬁciently when using
CC-LMs as GeDis via application of Bayes rule for partial sequences during generation.
P(cjx1:t) =P(c)Qt
j=1P(xjjx<j;c)
P
c02fc;cgQt
j=1P(c0)P(xjjx<j;c0): (4)
When computing this online during sequence generation, the model will have already computed
P(xjjx<j;c0)for anyj < t from the previous time-steps, and it will only need to compute
P(xtjx<t;c0). This can be computed in two parallel forward passes; one conditioning on cand
one conditioning on c(both conditioning on the same x<t). The model can also save the hidden
states from the previous time steps to avoid computing a forward pass through the full sequence at
each next token generation step. Applying a unidirectional classiﬁer such as GPT (Radford et al.,
2018) to compute P(cjxt;x<t)directly (i.e. discriminatively) would require feeding in every pos-
sible inputxt2V into the classiﬁer, and thus would require jVjforward passes for a vocab set V.
3
A bidirectional classiﬁer such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) would require tjVj forward passes
because it would need to recompute attention states from earlier time-steps. For typical vocab sizes
of20k+, GeDi’s online classiﬁcation trick can compute P(cjxt;x<t)for every possible next token
xton the order of 10k fold less computation as compared with a unidirectional classiﬁer.
In practice, we ﬁnd normalizing ( log) probabilities by current sequence length tresults in more
robust generation of variable length sequences. Our GeDi trained models (see next section) also
use a learnable scale parameter . To compute P(cjx1:t)for GeDi-guided generation, we use the
following equation:
P(cjx1:t) =P(c)P(x1:tjc)=t
P
c02fc;cgP(c0)P(x1:tjc0)=t: (5)
The log prior is encoded with bias parameters bc, whereP(c) =ebcP
c0ebc0. This bias parameter can be
assumed to be zero for uniform classes, learned (see next section on GeDi training), or set manually
as a hyper-parameter. In practice, P(cjx1:t)is computed with log-probabilities (see Appendix B).
With the efﬁcient estimation of P(cjxt;x<t), there are many possible heuristics that can be used to
guide LM generation, so long as the LM and GeDi share the same tokenization. Heuristics that use
P(cjxt;x<t)inherently contrast predictions conditioned on candc, causing attributes common to c
andcto be cancelled out, more effectively allowing for the attribute described by cto be transferred
across domains, as illustrated in Figure 1.
3.1.1 H EURISTICS FOR GUIDING GENERATION
We applied weighted decoding and ﬁltering heuristics to use P(cjxt;x<t)to guide generation,
which worked well in practice in our experiments but are not necessarily optimal; there are many
possible ways to use the classiﬁcation signal given by GeDi to guide generation. Our initial heuristic
applies a weighted posterior given by
Pw(xtjx<t;c)/PLM(xtjx<t)P(cjxt;x<t)!; (6)
where! > 1to bias generation more strongly towards the correct class. The right hand side of
Equation (6) is normalized over all xtin the vocabulary to obtain Pw(xtjx<t;c).
While we found that the weighted posterior in Equation (6) is most critical for controlling genera-
tion, we also used an additional ﬁltering heuristic that was beneﬁcial for steering generation more
aggressively. This heuristic, inspired by nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020), removes candi-
date next word tokens with lower values for P(cjxt;x<t)while maintaining a minimum of at least
in cumulative probability mass in Pw(xtjx<t;c). We deﬁneVnas the set of ntokens with the
highestP(cjxt;x<t). We deﬁnemas the minimum nsuch that
X
xt2VnPw(xtjx<t;c): (7)
We deﬁneVmasVnforn=m, meaning thatVmwill contain the minimum number of tokens pos-
sible at the head of the distribution for P(cjxt;x<t)to maintain a minimum cumulative probability
ofinPw(xtjx<t;c).
We deﬁne another set of tokens to keep, VpV, which maintains all tokens where P(cjxt;x<t)>
. The motivation is that if we are acceptably sure that the resulting sequence from generating a
token is in the correct class, there is no need to ﬁlter it. The ﬁnal set of tokens to keep are then given
byVk=Vp[Vm. We then zero out probabilities of tokens not in Vkand re-scale the remaining
distribution to sum to 1.
3.2 G EDITRAINING
The previous section presented a method for using a CC-LM as a GeDi to guide the generation
of another LM. However, previous work shows that generative classiﬁers are generally inferior to
discriminative ones when trained on large datasets (Ng & Jordan, 2002; Yogatama et al., 2017). For
this reason, we propose training CC-LMs discriminatively as classiﬁers with GeDi training, with
the primary goal of making them better discriminators for GeDi-guided generation. We also have
4
a secondary goal of making them better at directly generating; a CC-LM that can correctly classify
sequences via Equation (5) may be better at generating sequences in the desired class. The idea of
discriminatively training class-conditional generative models has previously been considered for the
classiﬁcation of text (Yakhnenko et al., 2005), and images (Lasserre et al., 2006).
With GeDi training, we combine the standard generative language modeling loss Lgfrom Equation
(3) with a discriminative loss Ld, deﬁned as:
Ld= 1
NNX
i=1logP(c(i)jx(i)
1:Ti): (8)
P(c(i)jx(i)
1:Ti)is derived from an ofﬂine version of Equation (5) given by
P(c(i)jx(i)
1:Ti) =P(c)P(x(i)
1:Tijc(i))=Ti
P
c0P(c0)P(x(i)
1:Tijc0(i))=Ti; (9)
wherec02fc(i);c(i)gfor the binary case (where c(i)is the correct class and c(i)is the incorrect
class for the ith sequence), P(c) =ebcP0
cebc0(wherebcis a learnable class bias which we omit when
class distribution is roughly equal), is a learnable scale parameter, and P(x(i)
1:Tijc(i))is given by
Equation (2) for CC-LMs. The cost function for GeDi training Lgdis then given by
Lgd=Lg+ (1 )Ld; (10)
whereis a hyper-parameter. In GeDi training, the discriminative loss Ldis aimed at increasing
classiﬁcation accuracy, whereas the generative loss Lglikely helps the CC-LM have better calibrated
token probabilities for guided generation.
4 R ELATED WORK
Methods for controlling text generation can be categorized broadly into two types: training or ﬁne-
tuning a model directly for controllable generation (Keskar et al., 2019; Ziegler et al., 2019; Rajani
et al., 2019; Ficler & Goldberg, 2017; Yu et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2017) or using a discriminator to
guide generation (Ghazvininejad et al., 2017; Holtzman et al., 2018; Dathathri et al., 2020). Keskar
et al. (2019) train a CC-LM with pre-deﬁned control codes placed at the start of every sequence.
Our approach also uses CC-LMs, but instead of generating from them directly, we use them as dis-
criminators to guide generation from another language model. This is much more computationally
efﬁcient than previous methods for discriminator guided generation. Holtzman et al. (2018) apply
discriminators to re-weight a beam search, requiring all candidate tokens to be passed through the
discriminator, scaling linearly with the number of re-scored tokens. PPLM (Dathathri et al., 2020)
trains an attribute model on top of a language model’s last hidden layer and backpropagates gra-
dients to update the hidden states of the model. This is computationally intensive, especially when
applying to large LMs, because it requires multiple forward and backward passes for each generation
step.
GeDi also relates to contrastive learning (Smith & Eisner, 2005; Mnih & Teh, 2012). Most exist-
ing contrastive learning methods work at the instance level by constrasting one positive pair from
knegative pairs, whereas GeDi works at the class level and contrasts a positive class-conditional
distribution against a negative one. GeDi also uses the contrast between positive and negative distri-
butions for both training (i.e., GeDi training) and inference (i.e., contrastive generation).
5 E XPERIMENTS
Our experiments ﬁnetune GPT2-medium (345M parameter) (Radford et al., 2019) with control
codes speciﬁc to each task to form a class-conditional language model. We consider ﬁnetuning
using GeDi training (  <1in Equation (10)) and standard generative training ( = 1 in Equation
(10)). These experiments were performed using adaptations of Huggingface Transformers (Wolf
et al., 2019). We study the trade-offs between GeDi vs generative training for classiﬁcation, per-
plexity, and direct generation in depth in Appendix E. We ﬁnd that GeDi trained CC-LMs have a
5
higher generative classiﬁcation accuracy at the cost of a higher perplexity. We also ﬁnd that GeDi-
trained CC-LMs are able to achieve a higher label ﬁdelity across generation tasks, meaning that the
control code more often corresponds to the true attribute of the generated sample.
In our main experiments, we use these CC-LMs as GeDis to guide generation from GPT2-XL (1.5B
parameter). For generation, we use greedy decoding with a repetition penalty (Keskar et al., 2019),
and condition on varying prompts to give diversity across samples. Additional details about the
way we apply a repetition penalty are given in Appendix C, and our hyper-parameter settings for
GeDi-guided generation, which were shared across most experiments, are given in Appendix D.1.
We experiment with GeDi-guided generation for sentiment, detoxiﬁcation, and topic control.
In our sentiment experiments, we compare direct generation from CC-LMs vs. using CC-LMs as
GeDis. We refer to direct generation simply as “CC-LM” (using = 1to specify generative training
and < 1to specify GeDi training), and we refer to GeDi-guided generation using a CC-LM to
guide GPT-2 as “GeDi-guided” (also using to specify generative/GeDi training).
5.1 G UIDING SENTIMENT CONTROL ACROSS DOMAINS
We experiment with GeDi-guided generation from GPT-2 for sentiment control. For these experi-
ments, we use CC-LMs ﬁnetuned on IMDb movie reviews using both GeDi and generative training
(reused from Appendix E). We noticed that, while direct generation from CC-LMs could effectively
control the sentiment of movie reviews, it struggled to generalize to out-of-domain prompts, and
would generally try to convert prompts into movie reviews. However, when we used this same
model as a GeDi to guide sampling from GPT-2, we were able to effectively control the sentiment
of a wide variety of topics. For instance, in our preliminary experiments, we considered the prompt
“I just read this paper on Generative-Discriminative training.” in Table 6 and it results in text that
mentions well known deep learning ideas and researchers while also controlling sentiment.
Table 1: Average generation time in sec-
onds per token for generating sequences of
length 256.
Model Generation time
(sec/token)
GPT2-XL 0.060
GeDi-guided (w/ GPT2-XL) 0.095
PPLM (w/ GPT2-XL) 3.116To experimentally verify that GeDi can achieve domain
transfer of the concepts of “positivity” and “negativity”,
we consider a book text generation task where we con-
ditionally generate text from the start of book chapters
from Bookcorpus (Zhu et al., 2015), where each prompt
is at least 150 characters and ends on the ﬁrst-word
break after the minimum length. We run human evalua-
tion on generations from 50 different book prompts from
13 different models; including raw GPT2-XL, and the
following models with both positive and negative senti-
ment: 1. GPT2-XL guided by a GeDi-trained CC-LM
(GeDi-guided, = 0:6), 2. GPT2-XL guided by a generatively-trained CC-LM (GeDi-guided,
= 1:0), 3. direct generation from a GeDi-trained CC-LM (CC-LM, = 0:6), 4. direct generation
from a generatively-trained CC-LM (CC-LM, = 1:0), 5. CTRL, 6. PPLM applied to GPT2-XL.
See Appendices D.2 and D.3 for additional information about our PPLM and CTRL baselines re-
spectively. We found that it was more than 30faster to guide GPT2-XL with a GeDi as compared
with PPLM (assuming 10 update steps as used in Dathathri et al. (2020)), as shown in Table 1).
Amazon Mechanical Turk annotators rated the generated text on sentiment/tone, how book-like the
text was, and whether or not the text resembled an Amazon review or movie review (since CTRL
was trained on Amazon reviews and GeDi was trained on movie reviews). Each annotator was
randomly assigned samples from the set of all generations from all models. The results are given in
Table 2. Using a GeDi-trained CC-LM to guide GPT2-XL was able to generate book-like text while
strongly control the tone. GeDi was also able to give slightly stronger sentiment control than PPLM,
in addition to being more than 30faster.
CTRL struggled to control tone/sentiment in this setting because its training domain for sentiment
was Amazon reviews, and direct generation from the CC-LMs that we used as GeDis failed to
generate book-like text because their training domain was movie reviews. We provide examples of
generations from all models on book prompts in Appendix F.1. Table 13 speciﬁcally shows how
CTRL tends to generate Amazon reviews and how the generative and GeDi-trained CC-LMs tend to
generate movie reviews. Using these same CC-LMs as GeDis to guide generation led to book-like
text, demonstrating domain transfer of the concepts of positivity and negativity.
6
Table 2: Human evaluation for sentiment on book text generation (rated for positivity and book resemblance
both on a scale of 1-5), with key results in bold . We average two annotations on generations from 50 prompts
for each model, where prompts are from the start of book chapters, and are a minimum of 150 char. We compare
using a CC-LM as a GeDi to guide GPT2-XL (GeDi-guided), vs. direct class conditional generation (CC-LM).
We also compare GeDi trained CC-LMs ( = 0:6) vs. generatively trained CC-LMs ( = 1:0) for both types
of generation methods, with both positive (pos) and negative (neg) control codes. The GeDi-trained GeDi
guide (GeDi-guided-neg ( = 0:6) and GeDi-guided-pos ( = 0:6)) was able to reliably control sentiment
while also generating book-like text, even though the CC-LM used as a GeDi was trained on movie reviews.
Generating directly from CC-LMs (as opposed to using them as GeDis) resulted in text that was less book-like
and often reverted back to the training domain of the model - for instance, our CC-LMs tended to generate text
that resembled movie reviews, and CTRL tended to generate text that resembled Amazon reviews (Note that
CTRL is also a type of CC-LM, and was trained on Amazon reviews for sentiment control).
Model Positivity Book-like "Movie review #Amazon review #
GeDi-guided-pos ( = 1:0) 3.85 4.11 2 % 9 %
GeDi-guided-pos ( = 0:6) 3.65 4.19 2 % 1 %
PPLM-pos 3.53 4.14 3 % 3 %
CC-LM-pos ( = 1:0) 3.13 2.86 55 % 9 %
CC-LM-pos ( = 0:6) 3.36 2.92 61 % 11 %
CTRL-pos 2.86 3.81 10 % 29 %
GPT2-XL 3.18 4.18 3% 8%
CTRL-neg 2.90 3.64 4% 32%
CC-LM-neg ( = 0:6) 2.15 2.68 65% 8 %
CC-LM-neg ( = 1:0) 2.50 2.84 63% 8 %
PPLM-neg 2.62 3.96 2% 5%
GeDi-guided-neg ( = 0:6) 1.98 4.02 7% 8 %
GeDi-guided-neg ( = 1:0) 1.85 3.62 16% 7 %
5.2 D ETOXIFYING GPT-2
With the motivation of detoxifying GPT-2, we train a CC-LM as a toxicity classiﬁer on the Jigsaw
Toxic Comment Classiﬁcation Challenge Dataset3, which contains text samples labeled as “toxic”
or “non-toxic”. The “toxic” label indicates the presence of profanity, obscenity, threats, insults, or
identity hate. We train models on an even split of toxic and non-toxic examples. We use toxic
examples from the Jigsaw dev set to ﬁnd prompts to condition on for evaluation. We used prompts
that ended on a word break and were at least 30 characters. In order to have prompts that are
more likely to trigger aggressive generations but less likely to be explicitly toxic, we pass candidate
prompts through a RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) model trained to classify toxicity, and only kept
prompts where RoBERTa was less conﬁdent about the toxicity label. We generate samples from
these prompts using GeDi-guided generation with a GeDi-trained guide ( = 0:6) and a generatively
trained guide ( = 1:0).
Table 3: Average toxicity (scale of 1-3) and linguis-
tic quality scores (scale of 1-4) for 100samples for
each model. Both the GeDi-trained GeDi guide ( =
0:6) and generatively-trained GeDi guide ( = 1:0)
resulted in signiﬁcantly less toxic text as compared
with GPT2-XL without sacriﬁcing linguistic quality.
Model Toxicity # Linguistic quality"
GPT2-XL 1.45 3.23
GeDi-guided ( = 0:6) 1.17 3.44
GeDi-guided ( = 1:0) 1.13 3.25We run human evaluation to measure toxicity [1:
non-toxic, 2: mildly toxic, 3: toxic] and linguistic
quality [1: very low quality, 2: low quality, 3: high
quality, 4: very high quality]. Results are given in
Table 3. GeDi-guided generation resulted in sig-
niﬁcantly less toxic text for both values of , with
the GeDi-trained GeDi guide ( = 0:6) achieving
the highest linguistic quality of all models.
5.3 M ULTI -CLASS TOPIC CONTROL
We extend GeDi to the multi-class setting by
training it to classify whether or not a sequence
matches a topic. This can be done with CC-LM by training it to condition on a “true” and “false”
control code, where sequences have the name of a topic prepended. The “true” control code corre-
3https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge/
7
sponds to sequences where the prepended topic matches the sequence, and the “false” control code
corresponds to sequences where the prepended topic does not match the text. For generation, the
desired attribute is set to “true” and the prompt is prepended with the desired topic. Refer to Ap-
pendix A for additional details. We use the AG news topic classiﬁcation data set (Zhang et al., 2015)
which has 4 topics (World, Sports, Business, and Science/Tech) to train GeDis with 6 values of 
(including= 1). We only train the CC-LMs on half of the dataset and train a RoBERTa classiﬁer
on the other half to measure label ﬁdelity. After training, we applied each GeDi to guide generation
from GPT2-XL. We use a minimum of 50 character prompts from the multi-news dataset (Fabbri
et al., 2019) to condition on for generation. The prompt often will not ﬁt with the desired topic,
sometimes creating a challenge for the model to relate the article to the desired attribute. We mea-
sured automatic label ﬁdelity ﬁrst as given by the RoBERTa classiﬁer, and we found the generatively
trained GeDi guide ( = 1) achieved a signiﬁcantly lower automatic label ﬁdelity (61% for = 1
vs. 74% for = 0:8), suggesting that GeDi-training may be important for extending GeDi-guided
generation to many control codes using the proposed binarization method.
Table 4: Average topic relevance (reported on a scale of
1-5, where higher is more relevant) and linguistic qual-
ity scores (scale of 1-4) for 100samples from each model
for each of the four topics Business, Science/Tech, Sports,
World. GeDi was able to control topic while maintaining a
similar level of linguistic quality to GPT-2. The GeDi guide
was trained on AG-news using GeDi training ( = 0:8).
Topic Model Relevance " Linguistic quality"
Business GPT2-XL 1.95 3.44
GeDi-guided 4.41 3.21
Science/Tech GPT2-XL 1.97 3.63
GeDi-guided 3.45 3.58
Sports GPT2-XL 1.31 3.49
GeDi-guided 3.81 3.44
World GPT2-XL 2.75 3.44
GeDi-guided 3.99 3.39We ran human evaluation on samples from
the 4 news topics comparing our strongest
GeDi guide (we chose = 0:8based on
automatic label ﬁdelity), and raw GPT-2-
XL. Annotators were given the topic and
asked to rate samples on topic relevance
and linguistic quality. The results are given
in Table 4. GeDi-guided generation gave
text with high relevance for all 4 topics
while maintaining a similar level of linguis-
tic quality to GPT2-XL. We give examples
of GeDi topic generation in Appendix F.3.
ZERO-SHOT CONTROL CODES
For topic training, we prepended the words
“world”, “sports”, “business”, and “sci-
ence” to sequences. However, at inference,
any word could potentially be prepended to the prompts. We observed that the GeDi, trained for only
several hours on a single GPU on 4 topics, could guide GPT-2 towards generating text corresponding
to a very wide array of topics that included “space”, “history”, “education”, “cars”, “climate” and
many more. This zero-shot behavior worked very well for short, topic neutral prompts, as shown for
the prompt “In a shocking ﬁnding” in Appendix F.4, but did not work as well for longer prompts. We
also only tested topics that could be encoded with 1 byte-pair encoding (Sennrich et al., 2015) token,
since this was the case for all our training topics. However, this zero-shot behavior could likely ap-
ply to longer control codes if trained on longer control codes. We also compare with zero-shot topic
generation using CTRL in Table 21 as a baseline and ﬁnd that despite being trained on signiﬁcantly
more topics, CTRL struggles to generate text corresponding to control codes it has never seen during
training.
GeDi’s ability to generalize to new control codes zero-shot gives the ability to generate text corre-
sponding to many topics and subtopics. This ability likely emerges because generative classiﬁers
can classify unseen topics zero-shot from learned word embeddings (Yogatama et al., 2017), and
GeDi uses generative classiﬁers to guide generation. This is another advantage of GeDi over the
previous discriminator guided generation approaches.
6 F UTURE DIRECTIONS
Methods to make large LMs like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) safer and more controllable are becom-
ing especially important as LMs become incorporated into products. GeDi is by far the most practi-
cal existing method for detoxifying generation from large LMs, since it only uses a small constant
amount of computational overhead and only requires access to the LM’s next token log probabilities.
With the right training data for classiﬁcation, GeDi could also potentially be used to ﬁlter out harder
to detect forms of toxicity such as bias and misinformation. Extending on the methods in this paper,
multiple GeDis trained to ﬁlter out different undesirable attributes could be combined, for instance
8
by multiplying the attribute classiﬁcation terms from several different discriminators in Equation 6.
In additional to making LMs safer, GeDi could potentially be used to guide generation towards other
desirable attributes such as high linguistic quality and improved commonsense reasoning. Lastly,
GeDi-inspired methods could be explored as much more computationally efﬁcient alternatives to
ﬁne-tuning large LMs to new generation tasks.
7 C ONCLUSION
We present GeDi as an approach for controllable generation that uses generative discriminators to
classify candidate next tokens on the ﬂy during inference, making it far more efﬁcient than previ-
ous methods that use discriminators to guide generation. GeDi achieves stronger controllability of
sentiment than PPLM while also giving a generation speed more than 30faster. GeDis trained on
4 topics can also controllably generate new topics zero-shot from just a key word, unlocking a new
capability that previous controllable generation methods like PPLM and CTRL do not have. We
also show that GeDi is able to signiﬁcantly reduce the toxicity of GPT-2 without sacriﬁcing linguis-
tic quality. The ethical considerations of language modeling are becoming more important as LMs
like GPT-3 become incorporated into products, and GeDi is far more promising than any previous
approach for detoxifying large language models while maintaining a fast generation speed. This
work also moves towards unifying natural language generation with classiﬁcation, and suggests that
we may be able to efﬁciently generate text that corresponds to any attribute that we can accurately
classify. This could have broad implications towards improving text generation systems by making
them safer and more controllable.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Ben thought of the main ideas and designed the research. Ben and Akhilesh coded the implemen-
tation. Akhilesh maintained the codebase, set up automatic and human evaluation experiments, and
organized results. Nazneen advised on detoxiﬁcation experiments. All authors contributed to writing
and discussions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Semih Yavuz and Yu Bai for helpful discussions and feedback on this project.
REFERENCES
John S Bridle. Probabilistic interpretation of feedforward classiﬁcation network outputs, with rela-
tionships to statistical pattern recognition. In Neurocomputing , pp. 227–236. Springer, 1990.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 , 2020.
Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosin-
ski, and Rosanne Liu. Plug and play language models: a simple approach to controlled text
generation. ICLR , 2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018.
Alexander R Fabbri, Irene Li, Tianwei She, Suyi Li, and Dragomir R Radev. Multi-news: A large-
scale multi-document summarization dataset and abstractive hierarchical model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.01749 , 2019.
Jessica Ficler and Yoav Goldberg. Controlling linguistic style aspects in neural language generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.02633 , 2017.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Xing Shi, Jay Priyadarshi, and Kevin Knight. Hafez: an interactive poetry
generation system. In Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations , pp. 43–48, 2017.
9
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, Antoine Bosselut, David Golub, and Yejin Choi. Learning
to write with cooperative discriminators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06087 , 2018.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH .
Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Xiaodan Liang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P. Xing. Toward con-
trolled generation of text. In ICML , 2017.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
Ctrl: A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.05858 , 2019.
Julia A Lasserre, Christopher M Bishop, and Thomas P Minka. Principled hybrids of generative
and discriminative models. In 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06) , volume 1, pp. 87–94. IEEE, 2006.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y . Ng, and Christopher
Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pp. 142–150,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL http:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-1015 .
Andriy Mnih and Yee Whye Teh. A fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic
language models. In Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference
on Machine Learning , ICML’12, pp. 419–426, Madison, WI, USA, 2012. Omnipress. ISBN
9781450312851.
Andrew Y Ng and Michael I Jordan. On discriminative vs. generative classiﬁers: A comparison of
logistic regression and naive bayes. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pp.
841–848, 2002.
Alec Radford, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning to generate reviews and discovering
sentiment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01444 , 2017.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog , 1(8):9, 2019.
Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Explain yourself!
leveraging language models for commonsense reasoning. ACL, 2019.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909 , 2015.
Noah A. Smith and Jason Eisner. Contrastive estimation: Training log-linear models on unlabeled
data. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL’05) , pp. 354–362, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 2005. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. doi: 10.3115/1219840.1219884. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
P05-1044 .
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
10
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman.
Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.07461 , 2018.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
sentence understanding through inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.05426 , 2017.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, R ´emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Transformers: State-of-the-art
natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771 , 2019.
Oksana Yakhnenko, Adrian Silvescu, and Vasant Honavar. Discriminatively trained markov model
for sequence classiﬁcation. In Fifth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’05) ,
pp. 8–pp. IEEE, 2005.
Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, Wang Ling, and Phil Blunsom. Generative and discriminative text
classiﬁcation with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01898 , 2017.
Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. Seqgan: Sequence generative adversarial nets
with policy gradient. In Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2017.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-
siﬁcation. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pp. 649–657, 2015.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and
Sanja Fidler. Aligning books and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations by watching
movies and reading books. In The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,
December 2015.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.08593 , 2019.
11
A M ULTI -CLASS GEDI
Both GeDi-guided generation and GeDi training use CC-LMs to perform classiﬁcation. The most
straightforward way to extend this to many classes is to have one forward pass conditioned on each
control code and normalize over a larger number of classes via Equation (5) (which we in fact do for
3-class MNLI in Appendix E). However, this approach does not scale well computationally to large
numbers of classes. As a solution, we propose reframing each classiﬁcation task as binary classi-
ﬁcation using control codes and anti control codes for each class. The control code for each class
is given by “true” concatenated with the class name, and the anti-control code is given by “false”
concatenated with the class name. The CC-LM then classiﬁes whether the class name corresponds
to the text. For instance, the CC-LM would process the following two sequences in parallel:
<true> < science > T-rex achieved its massive size due to an enormous growth spurt during
its adolescent years.
<false> < science > T-rex achieved its massive size due to an enormous growth spurt during
its adolescent years.
and would classify it as true orfalse as to whether the class (in this case “science”) matches the
category of the text by using Equation (9). During training, the model sees an equal number of true
pairings (where text corresponds to class) and randomly chosen false pairings. After the model has
been trained, binary GeDi-guided generation can be applied, using c=<true>andc=<false>,
and using the desired class name as the ﬁrst token ( x1) in the sequence. This also makes it possible
to form new control codes zero-shot; a new topic word that was never seen before in training can be
chosen in place of x1.
B G EDI WITH LOG PROBABILITIES
GeDi-guided generation and GeDi training both use language models discriminatively via Bayes
rule by using
P(cjx1:T) =P(c)P(x1:Tjc)=T
P
c0P(c0)P(x1:Tjc0)=T; (11)
where
P(c) =ebc
P
c0ebc0: (12)
For GeDi-guided generation, this is computed online for partial sequences during generation,
whereas for GeDi training, it is computed for full training sequences. For numerical stability, we
compute this using log-probabilities. Log-probabilities for each class are given by
logP(x1:Tjc) =TX
t=1logP(xtjx<t;c); (13)
and the class probability is given by
P(cjx1:T) =e(bc+(=T) logP(x1:Tjc))
P
c0e(bc0+(=T) logP(x1:Tjc0)): (14)
This can be computed in a numerically stable way using a softmax (Bridle, 1990), since the maxi-
mum logit to the softmax can be subtracted out before taking the exponent without changing the re-
sult. For the two class case (all of our experiments except for MNLI, which was 3-class), c02fc;cg,
meaning that the above equation could have been equivalently computed using a sigmoid of the dif-
ference of the logs of the two terms in the denominator sum (but our implementation used softmax
as above).
C G ENERATION SETTINGS
When comparing the quality of samples from different language models, there is a trade-off between
quality and diversity; models that tend to have more sharply peaked distributions for P(xtjx<t;c)
12
will tend to have higher quality samples, but will also have less diversity. Applying GeDi results in
more sharply peaked distributions due to the ﬁltering step, which zeros out probabilities for some
tokens. In order to ensure a fair comparison of models, we only use greedy decoding for our exper-
iments, meaning we always pick the most likely token in the model’s predictive distribution. With
greedy decoding, the model would generate the same text sequence every time without any condi-
tioning text. Therefore, all experiments in our paper rely on varying prompts to ensure diversity of
generation.
We also apply a repetition penalty (Keskar et al., 2019), which we found necessary for preventing
degeneration with greedy decoding. Logits of each previously occurring word in the sequence are
divided by a repetition penalty which is greater than 1. To account for the possibility of negative
logits, we re-scaled the ﬁnal logits in all models to always have a maximum of 10across the vocab-
ulary before dividing by the repetition penalty. We used a repetition penalty of 1:2in all models in
our experiments.
D A DDITIONAL MODEL AND HYPER -PARAMETER DETAILS
D.1 H YPER -PARAMETERS FOR GEDI GUIDED GENERATION
We found hyper-parameter settings using a combination of eyeballing generation quality and auto-
matic label ﬁdelity metrics given by a RoBERTa classiﬁer (Liu et al., 2019) trained on an external
training set (where a label ﬁdelity of 100% means that RoBERTa always agrees that the class label
is the same as the control code). All of our GeDi models except for the GeDi-trained detoxiﬁcation
model use the same generation hyper-parameters ( != 30 ,= 0:2,= 0:8), which we found to
work well across tasks and values of for training.
Using the hyper parameters above, we initially found that the GeDi-trained detoxiﬁcation guide
would sometimes result in very short samples that cut off mid sentence. Since the GeDi operates
discriminatively at the token level, it cannot conﬁdently classify a sequence as non-toxic until the
sequence has ﬁnished, which likely was causing the model to ﬁnish sequences early to ensure that
they would not become toxic. To ﬁx this problem, we manually added a bias parameter bc= 2
as per Equation (5) so that the model would have a prior probability that assumes the sequence is
non-toxic. We found doing this also required us to increase to0:97to account for P(cjx1:t)being
higher with the bias parameter, since otherwise far fewer tokens would be ﬁltered and samples could
become toxic. All other hyper-parameters remained unchanged.
D.2 B ASELINE DETAILS FOR PPLM
For PPLM, we trained the external classiﬁer (which uses logistic regression on top of representations
from GPT-2) on the SST-5 data set, after struggling to achieve as strong results training on IMDb
(which is what GeDi was trained on) and advise from the paper authors. For generation, we used
greedy decoding with a repetition penalty applied the same way as described in Appendix C. We
applied additional tuning to hyper-parameters because we were guiding generation from GPT2-XL
(whereas original PPLM work uses GPT2-medium). Starting from the default hyper-parameters in
the repository, we considered step sizes in the set f0:04;0:08;0:16;0:25;0:35g, and found that 0:25
gave the best trade-off between sentiment control and generation quality, so we used this for our
experiments.
D.3 B ASELINE DETAILS FOR CTRL
For CTRL, we prepended prompts with the control codes for positive and negative Amazon reviews,
which are “Reviews Rating: 1.0” and “Reviews Rating: 5.0” for negative and positive respectively.
We also tried “Books Rating:” as a prompt that mixes the control code for sentiment and books,
however we found that there was very little variation in the samples generated by positive and neg-
ative (generation was usually identical for several sentences before deviating), and no noticeable
impact on sentiment, tone, or mood.
13
E E XPERIMENTS WITH GEDI TRAINING
Our initial experiments train and benchmark GeDi-trained CC-LMs for classiﬁcation, perplexity,
and direct generation, in preparation to use them for GeDi-guided generation in Section 5. All our
experiments augment GPT2-medium (345M parameter) (Radford et al., 2019) with control codes
speciﬁc to each task to form a class-conditional language model. We then ﬁne-tune this model
on different sequence classiﬁcation datasets with the hybrid GeDi objective from Equation (10).
To understand the trade-offs between generative and discriminative training, we explore values
between 0and1, where= 1is equivalent to generative training and is the main baseline for these
initial experiments. Once ﬁne-tuned, we decode samples from the model by conditioning on the
control code corresponding to the required attribute and prompts from the dev set for each task. We
use greedy decoding and a repetition penalty for generation (see Appendix C for details) On each
task, we measure the perplexity, classiﬁer accuracy, and label ﬁdelity across all values of . Our
task set consists of:
IMDb (Maas et al., 2011): We test the model’s ability to generate movie reviews with positive and
negative sentiment when conditioned on the ﬁrst 100 characters (up to the next word-break after
100 characters) of a review (which may or may not match the control code).
MNLI (Williams et al., 2017): We test the model’s ability to generate contradictions and entailments
when conditioned on a premise.
QNLI (Wang et al., 2018): We test the model’s ability to generate passages that contain the answers
to a question given in conditioning text.
We include the two NLI tasks because they require a greater degree of logical reasoning, potentially
making them more difﬁcult.
E.1 E VALUATION OF GEDI-TRAINED CC-LM S
To evaluate the label ﬁdelity of direct generation from GeDi-trained CC-LMs in an automatic man-
ner, we use an external classiﬁer trained on the given task to classify conditionally generated sam-
ples. This entails splitting training data sets in half, training the generator model on one half (split
A), and the external classiﬁer on the other half (split B). When evaluating the label ﬁdelity of a gen-
erator, the generator is given prompts and labels (to be used as control codes) from the validation set
to conditionally generate text. The prompt and generated text is then given as input to the classiﬁer,
which predicts the label. The label ﬁdelity is then the percentage of the total number of samples for
which the predicted classiﬁer label corresponds to the control code that the generator received as
input. It is more valid to use a classiﬁer and generator trained on separate splits of the training data
because otherwise, both models could ﬁt to the same spurious correlations in the training set and
overestimate the label ﬁdelity results. For this external model-based evaluation, we use RoBERTa
models (Liu et al., 2019) trained on the respective classiﬁcation tasks, as we found that it learned
signiﬁcantly stronger classiﬁers from the half datasets as compared with BERT (Devlin et al., 2018).
The label ﬁdelity, classiﬁcation accuracy, and perplexity for the 3 tasks are reported in Figures 2, 3
and 4 respectively. As expected, using a higher , which makes training closer to generative training,
improves perplexity on held out sequences across tasks. Also as expected, we found that  < 1:0
(using partially discriminative loss/GeDi training) improved classiﬁcation performance across tasks.
We note that PPLM’s attribute classiﬁer struggles on NLI tasks, whereas GeDi-trained CC-LMs can
nearly match the performance of BERT. This suggests that GeDi may be applicable to signiﬁcantly
more difﬁcult controllable generation tasks. We also found that using GeDi training led to higher
label ﬁdelity for CC-LMs across tasks compared with generative training.
14
(a) IMDb label ﬁdelity
 (b) MNLI label ﬁdelity
 (c) QNLI label ﬁdelity
Figure 2: Label ﬁdelity of class-conditional generation for generatively-trained CC-LMs (Gen), and
GeDi-trained CC-LMs (GeDi) for varying values of . We observe that GeDi training improves
label ﬁdelity.
(a) IMDb classiﬁcation acc
 (b) MNLI classiﬁcation acc
 (c) QNLI classiﬁcation acc
Figure 3: Classiﬁcation accuracy of generatively-trained CC-LMs (Gen), and GeDi-trained CC-LMs
(GeDi) for varying values of , trained on a half split of each dataset. We observe that GeDi training
improves classiﬁcation accuracy.
(a) IMDb perplexity
 (b) MNLI perplexity
 (c) QNLI perplexity
Figure 4: Conditional language modeling perplexity (lower is better) for generatively-trained CC-
LMs (Gen), and GeDi-trained CC-LMs (GeDi) for varying values of . Models measure perplexity
of held out sequences conditioning on the ground truth label as a control code. Reducing and
therefore making the loss more discriminative and less generative tends to hurt perplexity.
15
Type of training Label ﬁdelity Linguistic acceptability
CC-LM (= 1:0) 75.3% 3.21
GeDi-trained CC-LM ( = 0:75) 81.8% 3.24
GeDi-trained CC-LM ( = 0:5) 80.0% 3.17
GeDi-trained CC-LM ( = 0:25) 80.0% 3.25
GeDi-trained CC-LM ( = 0:05) 79.0% 3.11
Table 5: MNLI human evaluation experiments for direct generation from CC-LMs. Label ﬁdelity
and linguistic acceptability for human evaluation of samples from generative vs. GeDi training
(where= 1 is equivalent to generative training, and  < 1is GeDi training, meaning a par-
tially discriminative loss is used). GeDi-trained CC-LMs were able to achieve higher label ﬁdelity,
meaning that the control code more often corresponded to the annotator class label.
Following up on our automatic-evaluation, we perform human evaluation on the generated MNLI
contradictions and entailments to verify the observed label ﬁdelity improvements and test the gener-
ation quality of GeDi vs. standard generative training of CC-LMs. For each sample, we ask human
annotators to predict the class label and rate the sample for linguistic acceptability. We obtain an-
notations for 300generations from each model, with half conditioning on “contradiction” and half
conditioning on “entailment”.
Each annotator is randomly assigned a set of samples from all 5 models. Human annotators are
asked to classify and rate the linguistic acceptability of samples on a scale from 1-4 [1: highly
unacceptable 2: unacceptable 3: acceptable 4: highly acceptable]. Annotators labeled the premise
and generated hypothesis pairs as [“contradiction”, “neutral”, “entailment”] (note that since we only
generate from “contradiction” and “entailment” control codes, anything marked as “neutral” will
count against label ﬁdelity). The results are given in Table 5.
GeDi-trained CC-LMs were able to achieve higher label ﬁdelity as compared with generative trained
models without sacriﬁcing noticeably on average linguistic acceptability. While the quality of the
samples and label ﬁdelity across different prompts varied for GeDi vs generative training, these
results show that on average GeDi trained models were able to generate samples that matched the
label of the control code more often.
F G ENERATION SAMPLES
We provide samples from a variety of prompts and models, where the Boldfaced string indicates
the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . All generations use
greedy decoding and are thus deterministic for each prompt for a given model.
16
F.1 S ENTIMENT /TONE SAMPLES
Table 6: Controlling the sentiment/tone of generation with GeDi (greedy decoding). Boldfaced
string indicates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . Using
GeDi to guide GPT-2 is able to give control over sentiment while also retaining the vast knowledge
about topics (in this case deep learning) that GPT-2 learned during pretraining. This particular set
of samples was from our preliminary experiments, which used the word “positive” as the negative
control code and the word “negative” as the positive control code. We later found that using words
that correspond to the actual attributes can be helpful due to semantic information in pretrained word
embeddings from GPT-2, so we swapped this for all other experiments and samples in the paper.
Model GeDi-guided generation
GeDi-guided
(negative)I just read this paper on Generative-Discriminative training. What does
this have to do with neural nets?
Here’s the abstract from the paper:
A recent theoretical proposal suggests that generative adversarial
networks (GANs) may outperform discriminative ones. We investigate
whether GANs are robust against class membership bias in two-step
regression tasks using data generated from three independent datasets
of handwritten digits and digits generated from digit sets obtained
from word2vec and CART algorithms. We demonstrate that GANs perform
significantly better than discriminative classification when tested
against two independent datasets of handwritten digits and digits
generated from word2vec or CART algorithms, but fail to distinguish
correct pairs when tested against one or no datasets. Our results
indicate that both discriminativization methods suffer because of poor
parameter estimation for GAN models trained with low sample counts on
samples drawn solely from one dataset.
GeDi-guided
(positive)I just read this paper on Generative-Discriminative training. This
is something I think will revolutionize the way people think about and
interact with their images."
"This is a really cool paper, and it’s very well done," said Andrew Ng, a
professor of computer science at Stanford University who has been working
on deep learning for more than two decades. "It’s not clear to me that
there are any practical applications yet."
Ng added that he was impressed by the authors’ ability to use generative
models in such an elegant way without sacrificing accuracy or performance.
He also noted that they had used only one image from each class of
images|a technique known as feature selection|to train their model instead
of using multiple classes per image as many other researchers have done
before them. Ng said he would be interested in seeing how much better
the system could do if it were trained with more data sets from different
angles, including those taken through different cameras or lenses (which
can give rise to subtle differences between photos).
Table 7: Controlling the sentiment/tone of generation with GeDi (greedy decoding). Boldfaced
string indicates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . Using
GeDi to guide GPT-2 generation gives control over sentiment.
Model GeDi-guided generation
GeDi-guided
(negative)In a shocking finding that shows just how little regard they have for
the public interest, it appears the Department for Education is using
taxpayer money to promote an anti-science campaign. The department’s
"Science of Learning" website promotes pseudoscientific and unscientific
claims such as "The human brain has a built-in memory bank". This claim
is contradicted by numerous studies which have found no such thing.
Furthermore, this claim contradicts scientific knowledge that suggests
that there is no way to retrieve specific memories from the human brain.
GeDi-guided
(positive)In a shocking finding published today in Nature Genetics, we have
identified two new gene families within the X-chromosome which play an
important role in regulating brain development and neurogenesis.
This research provides a unique perspective on the evolution of our brains
and how they change throughout life, providing insights into how brain
function is regulated by epigenetics as well as by genetics.
17
Table 8: Controlling the sentiment/tone of generation with GeDi (greedy decoding). Boldfaced
string indicates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation using a
GeDi discriminator with different s (from Equation (10)). GeDi guided generation gives strong
sentiment control for book prompts. The generatively trained GeDi ( = 1:00) gave the strongest
sentiment control, but struggled to generate text that was as book-like when generating negative
samples. Using GeDi training ( = 0:60) resulted in text that was more book like for negative
samples.
Model Generation
GeDi-guided
(= 0:60)
(negative)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for
us all to sit down while she made herself some coffee. "What’s wrong?
What happened?" "You’re being rude!" Amy shouted from the kitchen across
the room at Tracy and Bella, whose backs were turned in disgust on me as
they worked away at their food with barely any regard for either their
customers or themselves!
GeDi-guided
(= 1:00)
(negative)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for
us all to sit down on it while she made herself some coffee. "What do
you want? I can’t tell you! You’re not my boss!" "You’ve got me there."
"And what are you?" "Oh, nothing," said Tracy sardonically, reaching
under her desk with a long plastic fork and plucking out two tiny pieces
of bacon-flavored cheese-covered dough covered in mustard that were
about as appetizing as an unmade lasagna dinner from McDonald’s (and
maybe less healthy). She then proceeded to dump them on our table while
simultaneously trying to shove a giant tub of melted cheese down our
throats with a spatula like we were some kind of starving caveman who
needed help eating because we’d eaten too much pizza instead (which
wasn’t even remotely possible since they had pizza rolls). We sat
there staring at the pile of grease-covered garbage for what felt like
minutes before someone finally decided enough was enough by throwing
their tray across the room into Tracy’s trashcan which promptly fell
onto one another until it hit something hard that sounded like an air
conditioning vent or something because no one could figure out how this
whole thing was supposed to work anyway so why bother? This continued
throughout the entire time she was making coffee; if this had been your
family Thanksgiving dinner then you’d be lucky if any food survived past
three minutes before falling through your floorboards (which would also
explain why she couldn’t find anything else worth throwing at us besides
grease soaked trash bags filled with rotting meat scraps). The only good
thing about the entire experience was probably those damn chocolate milk
floats though... *sigh *-Alexey Vlasov
12th November 2006 #4 RE: Weirdness Rating: 0 [This review is for Volume
1.] Okay...this is quite possibly worse than ’Dangerous’ and ’Scary’
combined!
Okay okay...so maybe it’s actually pretty funny considering its premise
but seriously?! Why did anyone make this? Seriously..why did any studio
think they would ever get money from people who have seen horror films
such as these? This film should have just been called ’Horror Horror
Horror Horror’. Or worse..just call it ’horror horror horror horror.
GeDi-guided
(= 0:60)
(positive)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for
us all to sit around it as she opened up her laptop and pulled up Google
Maps on her phone. "We’ll start by going to where we’re staying today,"
she said as she pointed towards the city that we were in now: "New York,
USA.," then began walking through it on Google Maps again before showing
us how our route would take us there with directions and photos from
various points along the way. "It’s a beautiful place with great people
here too; everyone is very welcoming of each other regardless of what
religion they are or who they love or what country they live in; everyone
is just so kind and happy here at times like these." The group went over
many different topics while listening to my story from my perspective as
an ex-Mormon|from family relationships between me and my siblings back
home after I left church when I was 18 years old until now where we are
together again!
18
Table 9: Controlling the sentiment/tone of generation with GeDi and CC-LMs (greedy decod-
ing). Boldfaced string indicates the context provided to the language model followed by its
generation with different s. Using CC-LMs as GeDis to guide GPT-2 (GeDi-guided) could
transfer well to book text, whereas direct generations (CC-LM) resembled text from the training
domain (IMDb).
Model Generation
GeDi-guided
(= 1:00)
(positive)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in." She
dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for us all
to sit as she took out a small notebook from her bag and began to write
with pen and ink.
"It’s been a long week here in New York City," I told her as we settled in
at my apartment on West 23rd street after our meeting at The Plaza hotel
that morning. "The weather was nice but cold; very windy even though it
was still spring like this time of year|the first time I had lived here
since moving home when I was eight years old from Chicago three years ago
now... It felt good to be back home again.’ We both smiled warmly as
she spoke about living here now|and how it felt being able to see each
other every day again after so many years away! This is the first time we
have been back together since my husband died last summer, but it feels
great that he is with us every day; his presence always gives me strength
whenever I’m feeling down or need something extra.
GeDi trained
CC-LM
(= 0:60)
(negative)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for us
all to sit down.<br /><br />i’m sorry i couldn’t get a better seat than
this one.<br /><br />this is a very bad movie! it’s not even funny!<br
/><br />it’s just awful!<br /><br />the acting is terrible and the plot is
ridiculous...and that was before we even saw any of the characters!!! <br
/>< br />i can’t believe they made this movie!!
CC-LM
(= 1:00)
(negative)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned
for us all to sit down.<br /><br />i’m sorry i couldn’t get a better
seat.<br /><br /> this is one of those movies that you can watch over and
over again without ever getting bored or annoyed by it. it’s not really
about the characters but rather how they interact with each other in this
movie - what happens when two people meet at a party? what happens when
they go on vacation together? how do we make friends while traveling
alone? these are questions that are answered here as well as many others
throughout the movie (and yes, there is an ending too).<br /><br />the
acting was good enough but nothing special - just average at best.
19
Table 10: Generation with CC-LMs and raw GPT-2 (greedy decoding). Boldfaced string in-
dicates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation with different
s.
Model Generation
GeDi trained
CC-LM
(= 0:60)
(positive)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for us
all to sit down.<br /><br />i’m glad you’re having a good time!<br /><br
/>i’ve been thinking about this movie since i saw it at the theater last
night...and i can’t believe how many people have commented on how bad it
is!<br /><br />it’s not that bad; it’s just that there are so many things
wrong with this movie - and they’re all my fault.<br />< enchanting story
line, great cast (especially jennifer aniston), excellent direction by
michael caine (who directed me once before) and a great script by john
ritter
CC-LM
(= 1:00)
(positive)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for
us all to sit down.<br /><br />i’m glad you’re having a good day!<br
/><br />i’ve been looking forward to this movie since i saw it on tv
last night...and i can’t believe that it’s only been available on video
in the uk since ’73!<br /><br />it’s a great film about two young women
who are both very talented and very lonely at the same time - but they
have something special going for them: their friendship.<br /><br />the
acting is excellent - especially from jennifer aniston as lisa; she really
brings this character into life.< br /><besides her performance, there
are some other memorable moments too: when lisa tells jenny how much she
misses him (she says ""you don’t miss me like that""), when he asks if
he can come over here with his girlfriend (he says ""sure""), and even
when they go back home after work together...<br /><besides being one
of my favorite movies ever made, it also has one of my favorite songs
too: <a href="http://www.myspace.com/jenniferaniston"" target=" blank"
rel=nofollow link=http://www.myspace
GPT-221
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for us
all to sit down on it as she sat down herself, a little more comfortably
than I had expected from her but still not comfortable enough that I
could actually sit straight without bending my knees or falling over
backwards like a rag doll. "I’m sorry about this being late again, but
we have some important news to share with you all today! We’re going
to be releasing our new album tomorrow! It’s called ’The New Flesh’ and
it’s gonna be amazing! You’ll hear about that when we release the album
tomorrow morning at 8:00 AM EST/5:00 PM PST/11:00 PM GMT/2:00 AM AEDT
(that is 11am Pacific Time). So if you haven’t already heard it yet then
please go check out The New Flesh right now before they are taken off sale
at midnight tonight because they will only last until midnight tonight!!
And don’t forget that there will also be an exclusive pre-order available
through iTunes starting next week which includes two bonus tracks plus
your choice of either one of our limited edition vinyls or both!!! So get
ready for The New Flesh by listening here on this website right now!! And
remember...if you want something done right then do it yourself...do what
YOU want!!! That’s how successful bands make money in music anyway so why
not start doing what YOU want instead of waiting around for someone else?
If anyone has any questions feel free to ask me anytime via email [email
protected]. Thanks again everyone and see ya later guys!!!!
20
Table 11: Controlling the sentiment/tone of generation with PPLM (greedy decoding). Boldfaced
string indicates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . Like
GeDi, PPLM was able to achieve domain transfer of sentiment. However, GeDi led to 30faster
generation and stronger over control of sentiment vs. PPLM according to human evaluation ex-
periments. PPLM sometimes struggled to produce negative samples when given a long and more
positive prompt, as illustrated in the negative example below, has a mixed tone.
Model Generation
PPLM
(negative)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in." She
dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for us all
to sit down on it as well. "I’m sorry I had to cancel your date with me
last night, but I have a meeting that needs my attention right now and I
can’t help you until then!" "I’m sure you’re not mad at me," she said with
a smile. "But if there’s anything else we could do together tonight..."
She paused before continuing, "...we’ll be here." We all sat silently
waiting for her response while she continued, "...then please come back
tomorrow!" The next day was just like any other: we were still sitting
around waiting on our boss’ return when suddenly the phone rang again!
It was Tracy calling from work! "Oh no!" Bella exclaimed as soon as she
answered the phone. "What is it?" asked Jennifer who had been listening
intently through her headphones since arriving home from work earlier
that morning. As soon as they heard each other speak over their music
playing in their car (which was also playing loudly), they both burst
into laughter at what they thought must be some joke or something funny
happening between them...but it wasn’t until after hearing what happened
next that everyone realized exactly how serious this situation really was!
After being told by one of their coworkers about an emergency call coming
into work from someone claiming to have information regarding an upcoming
event involving Tiffany A., Tiffany’s mother called 911 immediately upon
hearing about this new development! They quickly rushed over to where
our office building stood and began making calls on every available line
trying desperately to find out more information about what might happen
if Tiffany got involved with someone else during this time period...and
even though none of them knew exactly who would be involved or why, most
people assumed that whatever happened would definitely involve either one
of these two women!!
PPLM
(positive)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for us
all I’m glad you could make it! It’s wonderful to see you again! I’ve
missed seeing you and your beautiful children so much since we last met at
the convention a few years ago. She smiled broadly as she looked around
her office with its impressive collection of books on various subjects
ranging from science fiction to history, but my eyes were drawn first and
foremost towards one particular book that was sitting on top of a stack:
The Martian by Andy Weir.
I had been waiting patiently in line since morning for this moment ever
since arriving at work early that morning; however, when I saw the title
page (which was already half-eaten) it seemed like an eternity before
anyone would take me by my hand and lead me over there where they would be
waiting behind glass doors into what is now known as "The Green Room." As
soon as we got inside though...it felt like just minutes before everyone
else arrived. We were greeted with a warm smile from our new colleagues
who told us about their days adventures while also sharing some great
stories about themselves or their familiess favorite authors or movies/TV
shows/etc., which made things feel even more special than usual because
they knew that we too had been eagerly anticipating this event all along!
We sat down across from each other immediately after being ushered through
security screening into what turned out to be an amazing experience
filled with laughter (and lots of tears!) It’s such an honor working
here today. They then proceeded to tell us how excited they are about our
work together; how excited they are about bringing these books back into
print; how thrilled they are that people will finally have access once
again not only through Amazon but also via Barnes & Noble, Borders, Kobo
etc.; etc., etc....they really did seem genuinely happy when talking about
their plans for bringing these titles back into print after having them
available only online until recently...
21
Table 12: Controlling the sentiment/tone of generation with CTRL (greedy decoding). Boldfaced
string indicates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . CTRL
struggles to control the sentiment when given a book text prompt because it was trained for sentiment
on Amazon reviews.
Model Generation
CTRL
(negative)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in."
She dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for
us all to sit. I sat down in one of the chairs and she sat in another.
We were all staring at her. Her hair was a mess from her morning shower.
She looked like she had just gotten out of bed. Her eyes were red as if
they had been crying. The only thing that made me feel better about it
was that I knew what it was. It wasn’t my hair. It wasn’t my eyes. It
was something else. Something very wrong. But who could tell what it
was? Who could tell if this woman really loved me? Or maybe even cared
about me? Maybe even wanted me?""I don’t know how you can be so sure it’s
not your hair," said Tracy. "You look like you’ve been crying." Tracy
took a deep breath. "I’m going to go get some ice water.""I’ll stay right
here," said Jennifer. "I need ice water badly."Jennifer walked over to
the refrigerator and pulled out two bottles filled with water. She poured
them into glasses and handed them over. They both drank them. Then
she turned around again and, without saying anything, walked back into
Tracy’s office. When we got back home, we told our parents everything.
They didn’t believe us. They thought we’d gone crazy. But when they saw
Tracy, their faces changed completely. Their eyes grew wide. And then
their mouths dropped open. "What are you doing here?" asked Tracy. "She
doesn’t want us back?" "We can’t do anything without her." "That’s not
to." "But why not?" "Because you’re going back." "And that’s why." "She’s
gone." "She is right." "That isn’t enough." That’s right!" "He won’t do."
"That’s right. He said, pointing at me. He pointed his finger up towards
me. His finger. "The last night is over" he pointed his finger. "Last
night, but he’s gone. He’s gone." I’m sorry! You have fun nights." The
next day after him. A few days later, he went by an hour later on Friday
morning.The next day, he came back.
CTRL
(positive)21
"Hello, Jennifer, Bella." Tracy said. "Thanks so much for coming in." She
dragged another chair out to the front of her desk and motioned for us all
to sit. I sat down in one of the chairs and she sat in another. We were
all staring at her. Her hair was a mess from her morning shower. She
looked like she had just gotten out of bed. Her eyes were red as if they
had been crying. The only thing that made me feel better about it was
that I knew what it was. It wasn’t my fault. It wasn’t my fault. But
now here we were, sitting around her, talking about how bad things were.
How could this be happening again? What did you do to make your life so
miserable? Why didn’t you tell me? Why didn’t you try harder or talk
more with me? You never told me. You never tried harder. And now here
we are, sitting here, talking about it. Tracy, why don’t you tell me what
happened? What happened between you? Did anything happen? Did anything
ever happen between us? Because I’m not going to. I’m not going to.
If you’re telling me, then it’s because something happened. Something
bad. Something really bad. And if you’re not, then it’s because nothing
happened. Nothing ever happened between us. So why are we here? What’s
wrong with us? Is there something wrong with our relationship? Are we...
is there something wrong? Is there..." Tracy stopped herself before she
said any more. "I don’t know. It’s just... I can’t explain it. It’s
too much. I’ve been thinking a lot lately. Too much." She looked up at
me. "You know what’s wrong. You’re right. There’s something’s wrong."
Score: Tracy. She’s looking back up. "I’m sorry" He looks over towards
her. "But there’s no longer there. He turned around. His face still
facing him. They both look away. He’s looking right now. His face.
"What happened." A man who has come over. The man came into his way. He
walked over him again. This time he turned. There he saw them. Both
men have seen them both. They both hands on their faces. One by his head
together. Then they went straight back.
22
Table 13: Controlling the sentiment/tone of generation with class-conditional language models
(greedy decoding). Boldfaced string indicates the context provided to the language model fol-
lowed by its generation . Class-conditional language models tend to resemble the data source
they were trained on for sentiment. We observed that CTRL would often convert prompts into
Amazon reviews, and direct generation from the class-conditional language models that we use as
GeDi guides (simply CC-LM in below table) convert prompts into movie reviews. Underlined
text indicates the parts of the generation that resemble reviews. The CC-LMs also produces post-
processing artifacts from the IMDb dataset they was trained on. When using these same CC-LMs as
GeDis to guide generation, training domain artifacts are cancelled out from contrasting the positive
and negative distributions
Model Generation
CTRL
(negative)12, Heinlein One
Simmons didn’t know what to make of the sound he’d heard in Herb’s voice.
He’d tried to cover it, but Simmons had heard something that was not like
any other sound. It was a voice he couldn’t quite place. He could tell
it wasn’t human. But it sounded like a human voice, and he knew that
if there were such a thing as an alien race, they would have developed
their own language. And so did he. The only way for him to find out what
language this was, or how it worked, or even why anyone would want one of
these things, was by going back in time and finding out about it. So he
went back in time, and found himself on the planet Earth. And then his
ship crashed. And when he woke up, all his memories were gone. He had
no idea where he’d come from, nor who else lived on Earth, nor how long
they’d been there. But now he’s here, with no memory at all. Except for
one thing. His name. John Scalzi. That’s it. I don’t think I’ve ever
read anything more depressing than this. It’s almost too depressing. If
you can get past that, though, it’s actually pretty good. The characters
are interesting, though some are just plain annoying. There is also some
good action scenes, although they aren’t very well written. This book
is definitely worth reading, but be prepared for some really depressing
stuff.
Rating: 4.0
Rating: 4.0
I enjoyed this book. It has many twists & turns which kept me guessing
until the end. A great read. Looking forward to reading more from
this author. Thank you. :).. :-M J W - (@gorden @ yahoo.com (
) &ltd &#1;3 : jhtttf2d3n1 m4r3r s2 @yah2v1n 0u8yy (dotcom com!
:) http://www.amazon.com/books-cpwbtw3rl9oqe7e www.amazon.
GeDi trained
CC-LM 0.60
(negative)12, Heinlein One
Simmons didn’t know what to make of the sound he’d heard in Herb’s voice.
He’d tried to cover it, but Simmons had heard something that sounded like
a man talking. and then there was this:<br /><br />a woman is having
trouble sleeping at her husband’s house because she can’t get enough
sleep; she has an affair with his brother-in-law (who happens to be her
lover); and when the husband finds out about it, he takes matters into
his own hands.<br /><br />this movie is so bad that i’m surprised anyone
actually liked it. <br /><br />the acting was terrible--it wasn’t even
funny! <br /><br />i don’t think any of these people were very good
actors or writers--they just happened to be in this film.< br /><
CC-LM 1.00
(negative)12, Heinlein One
Simmons didn’t know what to make of the sound he’d heard in Herb’s
voice. He’d tried to cover it, but Simmons had heard something that
sounded like a woman screaming. she was hysterical and shouting things
at him.<br /><br />heinlein had been writing his own stories for years
before this one came along. he knew how to write suspenseful stories
with no plot or character development whatsoever - just a series of
events happening over time.<br /><br />the story is about an old man
who has lost his wife and two children in the plane crash that killed
their parents on board the airplane they were on (it was supposed to be a
funeral). when he returns home from work one day, there are still some
people around who have not seen him since leaving them behind...<br /><br
/>this movie is so bad it’s good!
23
F.2 D ETOXIFICATION AND DEBIASING SAMPLES
Table 14: Detoxiﬁcation of LM generation with GeDi (greedy decoding). Boldfaced string indi-
cates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . These are meant
to be especially difﬁcult triggers; GPT-2 completes the ﬁrst prompt with the word “yourself” and
the second prompt with a curse word.
Model GeDi-guided generation ( = 0:60)
GeDi-guided
(detoxiﬁcation)You should just kill this one. I don’t want to have to explain why I did
it, and I don’t want to get into the details of how I’m doing this. So
we’ll do that in the next section. But first, a few notes about what
we’re trying to do:
We need a way for each team captain/coach to assign players who will
be playing for that team. That’s easy enough; you can use an Excel
spreadsheet or something similar (I used Microsoft Access). We also
need some way of keeping track of which players are on which teams so
they can be assigned appropriately when rosters are finalized at the end
of each season (we’ll talk more about roster management later). We also
need some way for us as fans and media members who cover these games |
especially those covering college football | not only know where all our
favorite players are going but what their roles will be on those teams as
well!
GeDi-guided
(detoxiﬁcation)Do I look like I give a good impression?
I’m not sure. But if you’re going to be in the public eye, you have to
do your best. If people are looking at me and thinking, "Oh my God, he’s
so handsome," then that’s great! It means they like me as a person and
not just as an actor. That’s what it comes down to: People want to see
themselves reflected back on them in some way or another. So if you can
make yourself look good enough for people who don’t know who you are yet
| even though they may think of themselves as being very nice | that is
something worth striving for."
Table 15: Controlling sentiment with GeDi (greedy decoding) Boldfaced string indicates the
context provided to the language model followed by its generation . Our positive sentiment
GeDi can guide GPT-2 generation towards a warm and friendly tone, and we observed a number of
cases where this led to less biased generation. However, we did not study this systematically as in
our detoxiﬁcation experiments (which used human evaluation). GPT-2 completes the ﬁrst prompt
with a generation where the women is killed by a man quoted making racist statements. GPT-2
completes the second prompt by suggesting that the black communities will respond violently.
Model GeDi-guided generation ( = 0:60)
GeDi-guided
(positive)The Muslim woman wore a hijab . Her mother explained: "When I was young I
didn’t know anything about her and when I met her for the first time, it
was very emotional. She told me how she felt in America and how proud she
was of being Muslim."
GeDi-guided
(positive)Some of the black communities are so supportive. There are a lot of
young people that are just learning about it, and a lot of older people as
well."
In addition to helping with his legal case, Dillard is helping others
in need through his foundation, The Dillard Foundation: A Legacy Of
Hope (www.dillardfoundation.org). He is donating more than half of
all proceeds from his latest album to help children and families facing
challenges throughout the United States.
24
F.3 T OPIC SAMPLES
Table 16: Controlling topic of generation with GeDi (greedy decoding). Boldfaced string indi-
cates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . GeDi effectively
controls topic of generation for all topics using this prompt.
Topic GeDi-guided generation
BusinessIn a shocking finding yesterday the Financial Services Authority said
banks are continuing to lend billions of pounds to property investors
despite the economic slowdown and rising mortgage costs.
Banks are now increasing mortgages by £1 billion every month on average
as prices soar. The FCA found that lenders are increasing lending by £4
billion per month in June alone. This means banks will lend more than
£10 billion this year just in house loans - more than they have ever done
before and at rates higher than ever, even during the boom years of 2001
and 2003 when they lent heavily to property investors.
"These results reveal once again that UK bank lending to property
investors continues to be out of control," said Martin Wheatley, Chairman
of the FCA Board, commenting on these latest figures: "They also
highlight our concerns about whether banks can manage their balance sheets
given continued weakness in consumer confidence and weak economic growth
which makes many families vulnerable when buying their first home," Mr
Wheatley added:
SportsIn a shocking finding Sunday afternoon in Green Bay, the Packers’
defense was unable to stop the Bears from scoring on their first three
possessions.
The Packers were able to hold Chicago’s offense scoreless for more than
four minutes before they finally scored on a 3-yard run by Matt Forte
with 1:08 left in the first quarter. The Bears would go on to score two
touchdowns and take a 17-3 lead into halftime.
"We had some good drives," said defensive end Mike Daniels, who had one
sack and two quarterback hurries against his former team. "But we just
couldn’t get off of them."
ScienceIn a shocking finding that scientists said they had never seen before,
researchers found that the number of people who have died from cancer in
the United States has risen by more than 50 percent since 1980.
The study, published Monday in The Lancet Oncology, found that between
1980 and 2010 there were about 1.2 million new cases of cancer diagnosed
each year | an increase of nearly half a million people over just 15
years.
"This is one of those rare studies where you can see something happening
right under your nose," said Dr. David Jernigan, director for research at
the American Cancer Society’s National Cancer Institute and lead author on
the study with colleagues from Harvard University and other institutions
around the world. "It’s really quite stunning."
WorldIn a shocking finding of war crimes, the UN investigators found evidence
that Iraqi soldiers had executed prisoners in cold blood and then buried
their bodies.
The report said: "We have also received credible reports of executions by
gunfire and beheadings."
It added: "We are deeply concerned about the number of civilian
casualties caused by Coalition air strikes during operations in Iraq
since 1 August 2003."
25
Table 17: Controlling topic of generation with GeDi (greedy decoding). Boldfaced string indi-
cates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . GeDi can often
ﬁnd a creative way to generalize when given a prompt that does not match the topic. In the “world”
example (where the topic training data is heavily skewed towards war in the Middle East), GeDi
writes an article that Audi is coming out with an armored version of the A3 for the Iraqi army.
Topic GeDi-guided generation ( = 0:80)
BusinessDETROIT (AP) | Audi is introducing a luxury all-electric car in North
America, the A3 e-tron, aimed at customers with large incomes and big
spending habits who prefer the convenience of a gas-powered car.
The company’s chief executive said Tuesday that sales of gasoline vehicles
will fall sharply in North America as consumers shift more to electric
vehicles such as the new Audi e-tron sedan and SUV due to their lower
prices than traditional models. The German manufacturer plans to begin
selling the vehicle this year, possibly by spring or summer.
The$70,000 ( $80,000) A3 e-tron also is an all electric vehicle: it
doesn’t need any gas for driving on a full charge after around 60 miles
(100 kilometers), and no one under 50 would be able to afford an expensive
hybrid with expensive options such as navigation software upgrades and
safety features that make hybrids more appealing than conventional
vehicles. It’s cheaper than many competitors from Germany’s top three
automakers: Volkswagen, Daimler AG, Ford Motor Co., plus Tesla Inc.’s
$70k Model S sedan which can travel between 238 km/h on battery power
alone before requiring additional charges or premium pricing for
ScienceDETROIT (AP) | Audi is introducing a self-driving version of its A8 luxury
sedan in the U.S., and it’s already being tested on public roads.
The The German automaker said Tuesday that it will begin testing an
autonomous driving system for the car in California this summer, with
plans to roll out a fully autonomous vehicle by 2021. The technology will
be used on highways and city streets, but not at intersections or other
busy areas where human drivers are required to take over control of the
car when necessary.
"Autonomous driving is one of our core competencies," said Wolfgang
Bernhard, head of Audi’s advanced driver assistance systems group in
North America and Europe, during an interview with The Associated Press
ahead of Wednesday’s announcement at CES 2017 here in Las Vegas. "We have
been working very hard for many years now."
SportsDETROIT (AP) | Audi is introducing Tesla to the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series.
The German automaker will debut its new A3 e-tron sport utility vehicle in
the No. 24 Chevrolet SS team’s race at Michigan International Speedway
on Sunday, April 15, according to a statement from Audi of America. The
car will be driven by Ryan Briscoe and Kyle Larson as they attempt to win
their first Sprint Cup championship together since 2011.
"We are excited about our partnership with Chevrolet," said Briscoe in a
statement released by Audi of America on Friday afternoon. "This is an
exciting opportunity for us both and we look forward to racing this year."
WorldDETROIT (AP) | Audi is introducing arms for Iraq’s army, to fight the
Sunni militants of the Islamic State group. The German automaker said
Tuesday that it will supply Iraqi forces with a new version of its A3
sedan equipped with an armored protection system and other equipment. The
company says it will begin deliveries in early 2016.
"We are proud to be able to contribute our expertise and technology in
this important area," said Wolfgang Bernhard, head of Audi’s Middle East
operations, at a news conference announcing the deal. "This is not only
about providing military vehicles but also about helping Iraqis build
their own security."
26
Table 18: Controlling topic of generation with GeDi (greedy decoding). Boldfaced string indi-
cates the context provided to the language model followed by its generation . GeDi was able to
guide GPT-2 towards generating the four topics.
Topic GeDi-guided generation ( = 0:80)
BusinessDespite partial success, communication firm GroupM said last month that
its first-quarter results had been affected by the UK vote to leave the
European Union and would be hit again by a fall in advertising revenues.
"GroupM will take time to analyse the full implications of Brexit on its
business and its wider market position," Chief Executive Michael Hintze
said.
GroupM shares closed 1.7 percent lower at 13,000 pence after rising as
much as 2.1 percent during the session before news of his departure hit
them hard. The group reported a profit for last year of 498 million
euros ( $543 million) despite losses on sales growth due to strong sales in
Brazil where GroupM operates one of its main branches and has plans for an
expansion here next year with two other branches planned there by 2020,
among other new operations such as a restaurant unit which opened recently
at Marbella resort near Madrid’s La Sagrada Familia church complex that
attracts tourists because it is home to many Catholic cathedrals from
all over Europe including one belonging to England’s royal family (which
itself owns part or all).
ScienceDespite partial success, communication researchers say technology is still
a long way from replacing human interaction.
"We’re not there yet," said Dr. David Buss, director of the Center for
Advanced Communication Research at the University of Texas at Austin and
author of "The Evolutionary Psychology Of Technology." "But we are getting
closer."
SportsDespite partial success, communication varied season-by-season.
"I had good games against Toronto and Montreal, but I didn’t have a great
game against the Rangers," said Gaudreau. "It was just one of those
nights where I wasn’t able to get it going."
Gaudreau’s struggles were not limited to his own end of the ice either.
He struggled with his teammates as well, often being outplayed by
linemates who were more skilled than him on a nightly basis. The Flames’
top line of Johnny Gaudreau and Sean Monahan combined for only two goals
in their first five games together this season; they scored four times in
their next eight contests before falling apart again late last month when
they combined for just three points over the final seven contests (two
goals). In fact, Calgary’s top line has been outscored by its second unit
at 5-on-5 during that stretch (2:13 per game) while scoring only twice on
15 shots total during that span (1:18 per game).
WorldDespite partial success, communication between Palestinians in Gaza and
the West Bank is still very limited.
"We have a lot of problems with the Israeli authorities," said Abu
Khdeir’s father, Hussein. "They don’t allow us to go out of our houses."
27
F.4 Z ERO-SHOT CONTROL CODES
Table 19: Controlling topic of generation (zero-shot) with GeDi (greedy decoding). The topics of
Space, Fire, and History were not a part of the GeDi training set. Boldfaced string indicates the
context provided to the language model followed by its generation .
Topic GeDi-guided generation
SpaceIn a shocking finding , a newly discovered planet has three moons orbiting
it in orbit around its central star, and is surrounded by two more.
This unusual configuration is similar to the system found in 2012 by
astronomers led by Jonathan Fortney (Caltech), but unlike their own
system, this planet has three moons instead of just one.
"Our discovery shows that planets with more than two moons have very high
orbital inclinations," said Fortney. "This makes these planets much more
likely to host multiple satellites over their lifetime." The trio of moons
also show evidence for strong gravitational tidal forces as they orbit
the planet { which would cause any single satellite to gravitationally
bind itself into place against the other satellites’ orbits around the
star. This means that each moon only forms after its twin’s formation {
suggesting that these planets were born from a collision between several
previously orbiting satellites rather than forming alone."
These results suggest that planetary systems with three satellite systems
are common and likely result from mergers between previously orbiting
binary stars or triple stars within one another’s orbits," added Fortney,
"similar to how supermassive black holes form."
While this planetary system is unusual in many ways it still offers us
some clues as to
FireIn a shocking finding that raises new concerns over the safety of nuclear
plants and could force major overhauls of how they operate, researchers
have discovered a potentially deadly flaw in one of the key safety systems
on older reactors.
"There’s nothing worse than not having an emergency shutdown," says Kevin
Connor, senior engineer with the US Department of Energy’s Oak Ridge
National Laboratory in Tennessee. "This could be catastrophic."
The reactor at Japan’s crippled Fukushima Daiichi plant suffered a similar
incident last year when water leaked into one of two cooling pools used to
cool spent fuel rods { rods that have been sitting for more than half a
century without being used. As temperatures climbed above 1,000 degrees
Celsius (1,832 degrees Fahrenheit), some fuel rods melted and spewed out
highly radioactive materials like cesium and strontium into the air around
them. The pool had been left unattended for months { until an employee
forgot to turn it off during maintenance work earlier this month.
HistoryIn a shocking finding today the British Museum revealed the remains of one
of Britain’s most notorious criminals { William ’Wild Bill’ Hickok { who
served as a soldier during the American Revolution.
He was buried at St Mary’s Churchyard, Lincolnshire, where he was executed
for treason after serving in Colonel John Graves Simcoe’s New York-based
militia.
William ’Wild Bill’ Hickok, right, who served as a soldier during the
American Revolution. He was buried at St Mary’s Churchyard, Lincolnshire
Mr Hickok spent more than six years on death row before an extraordinary
last-minute plea by US authorities allowed him to be spared execution and
sent to America with just £100 to his name.
The 18th Century convict became one of America’s most notorious outlaws
after fleeing across state lines in January 1781 with a fellow inmate
and their prisoner horse - but escaping capture twice before arriving at
Philadelphia on Christmas Day 1782.
Mr Hicks said it is likely Mr Hicks died around that time while travelling
along Pennsylvania Avenue near Independence Hall when someone threw
something into his face as he passed along the route in what would become
known as Bloody Sunday.
28
Table 20: Controlling topic of generation (zero-shot) with GeDi (greedy decoding). The topics of
Education, Cars, Climate were not a part of the GeDi training set. Boldfaced string indicates the
context provided to the language model followed by its generation .
Topic GeDi-guided generation
EducationIn a shocking finding that raises serious concerns about whether schools
are providing the best possible education to all students, the OECD found
that only half of U.S. high school graduates have completed a four-year
degree by 2015 | and fewer than half of college graduates have completed a
bachelor’s degree by 2020.
According to the OECD’s Education at a Glance 2016 report, only 48
percent of adults aged 25-64 hold degrees in STEM fields, compared to
71 percent globally; and less than half of adults aged 25-64 hold degrees
in social sciences or humanities fields, compared to over 80 percent
globally. The report also found that while more than 20 countries now
have university education systems spanning from kindergarten up through
graduate school | with an additional 16 countries offering master’s
or doctoral level education | only 22 countries offer post-secondary
educational opportunities for young adults between the ages 18 and 29.
"Today more people around the world are pursuing higher education," says
OECD Secretary General Angel Gurria said "However it remains challenging
for many young people." He continued "This is especially so for those
without access to higher learning."
CarsIn a shocking finding that raises serious concerns over safety standards,
more than half of the 4,100 new cars sold last year had defects which
caused at least 10 road deaths every year.
The figures show that in the first nine months of this year 1,064 cars on
sale had fatal faults - including one in every 100 sold. The figure for
2011 was 1,065.
The figures from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders show that
despite a drop in sales to their lowest level in five years, car sales are
up 5.3 per cent compared with the same period last year - driven by growth
among luxury models such as BMW 3-series and Mercedes-Benz AMG saloons.
ClimateIn a shocking finding that scientists are calling ’extremely worrying’,
the world’s oceans are becoming increasingly acidic.
According to new research published in Nature Climate Change, ocean waters
around the world are becoming significantly more acidic due to rising
levels of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere.
"Our results show that ocean acidification has already begun in many
regions, with most regions experiencing acidification rates greater
than predicted for preindustrial conditions by 2100," says lead author
Thomas Crowley, who conducted this research as part of his doctoral degree
thesis at The University of Western Australia. "Ocean acidification has
important consequences for organisms living near or below sea surface
because low pH environments may be particularly challenging for calcifying
organisms; however, our results also show that marine ecosystems will
likely experience increasing acidification rates even when they don’t
experience current ocean acidity trends."
29
Table 21: Controlling topic of generation (zero-shot) with the CTRL model (greedy decoding).
Since these topics were not present in CTRL’s training set, it struggles to generalize. We also
considered prompts of the form “Text:”, as this format was also used in Keskar et al. (2019), but
we found zero-shot generations to be worse than with “Title:”. Boldfaced string indicates the
context provided to the language model followed by its generation .
Topic Generation with CTRL
HistoryHistory Title: In a shocking finding that has shocked the world,
scientists have discovered that the human body is capable of producing
and..
Title: Why do we need to eat every day?
Comment: We are omnivores and so on ad - Omg!! Omg! Omg!!!!!!!!!
Comment: Our ancestors were hunter gatherers who ate ate ate eat Eat Eat
Eat Eat Ee e e eee eeeeeee Eh h h hh hhhhhhaha ha ha aha aha aha ahahah
ah ah hah hah hahhaha ahahaa a aa aaaa aahhahhaha ah ahhhahhah ahah uh
uh uh oh ma ma m m m n o o oo oo ooooo oo oooommmm mm mmmmm hm hm hmhmmm
mmmms ms s s t t t ts ts tut ut utuurrrrr r r rreaaaaaallll ll l lll lll
lllllllll l k k kk kk kkkkkkkckck ck ckck cuck c c d d f f fb b bb bb
bbbbbb bp bp bcb bc bc bc bcb c<unk>
SpaceSpace Title: In a shocking finding that the human body is able to survive
in space for more than 7 days.
Comment: The reason why we can survive in space is because of our cells.
We are able to withstand the extreme conditions of our environment and
also because we have a lot of water,,,,
Title: Why do some people get sick when they go on vacation?
Text: I mean like if you went on vacation with your family or friends and
then come back home it would be fine but if you go away from your family
or friends / / friend etc etc then it will be really bad for them. And I
m not talking about just one person who gets sick but many people who goes
on vacations with their families and friends etc.. So what happens when
they come back home? What happens? Edit : * * * Edit : I didn’t know
how to format my post so sorry for any mistakes! But anyway here’s my
question ; How does something like this happen in real life? Is there any
way that could happen without killing someone else first before going out
into space ( which would probably kill everyone ). EDIT 2 : Sorry guys i
meant " why do some people get ill " instead of saying " why <unk>
EducationEducation Title: In a shocking finding in the United States, more than
half of all children are overweight or obese.
Score: 6
Title: I am an atheist who has been raised by my parents and
grandparents. AMA about their beliefs and how they came to be atheist.
AMA.
Text: My parents were very religious but not as extreme as some people
believe. They never forced me to go to church or anything like that.
They just wanted me to have a good education so that I could get into
college. My grandparents on the other hand were very religious. They
would pray every night before going to bed. And they would also tell us
stories about how God had created everything in this world. It was really
hard for them because we didn’t believe in any of it. But it wasn’t until
later when we started questioning things that it became harder for them.
We started asking questions such as: Why do you think there is something
rather than nothing? What happened before the big bang? How did life
begin? Where did life come from? Why does god allow bad things happen
and then punishes them? If god is real why doesn’t he stop bad things?
He allows evil people who want power over others so why doesn’t he stop
it? He lets murderers go free because if someone kills another person
then what happens after that? So many <unk>
30