Title: Directional Bias Amplification

Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Angelina Wang and Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University
Abstract
Mitigating bias in machine learning systems
requires reﬁning our understanding of bias
propagation pathways: from societal structures
to large-scale data to trained models to impact
on society. In this work, we focus on one aspect
of the problem, namely bias ampliﬁcation : the
tendency of models to amplify the biases present
in the data they are trained on. A metric for
measuring bias ampliﬁcation was introduced
in the seminal work by Zhao et al. (2017);
however, as we demonstrate, this metric suffers
from a number of shortcomings including
conﬂating different types of bias ampliﬁcation
and failing to account for varying base rates of
protected attributes. We introduce and analyze
a new, decoupled metric for measuring bias
ampliﬁcation, BiasAmp!(Directional Bias
Ampliﬁcation). We thoroughly analyze and
discuss both the technical assumptions and
normative implications of this metric. We
provide suggestions about its measurement by
cautioning against predicting sensitive attributes,
encouraging the use of conﬁdence intervals due
to ﬂuctuations in the fairness of models across
runs, and discussing the limitations of what
this metric captures. Throughout this paper,
we work to provide an interrogative look at the
technical measurement of bias ampliﬁcation,
guided by our normative ideas of what we want
it to encompass. Code is located at https:
//github.com/princetonvisualai/
directional-bias-amp .
1. Introduction
The machine learning community is becoming increasingly
cognizant of problems surrounding fairness and bias, and
. Correspondence to: Angelina Wang <an-
gelina.wang@princeton.edu >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).correspondingly, a plethora of new algorithms and metrics
are being proposed (see e.g., Mehrabi et al. (2019) for a sur-
vey). The analytic gatekeepers of the systems often take the
form of fairness evaluation metrics, and it is vital that these
be deeply investigated both technically and normatively. In
this paper, we endeavor to do this for bias ampliﬁcation.
Bias ampliﬁcation occurs when a model exacerbates biases
from the training data at test time. It is the result of the
algorithm (Foulds et al., 2018), and unlike some other forms
of bias, cannot be solely attributed to the dataset.
Directional bias ampliﬁcation metric. We propose a new
way of measuring bias ampliﬁcation, BiasAmp!(Direc-
tional Bias Ampliﬁcation),1that builds off a prior metric
from “Men Also Like Shopping: Reducing Gender Bias
Ampliﬁcation using Corpus-level Constraints” (Zhao et al.,
2017), that we will call BiasAmpMALS . Our metric’s tech-
nical composition aligns with the real-world qualities we
want it to encompass, addressing a number of the previous
metric’s shortcomings by being able to: 1) focus on both
positive and negative correlations, 2) take into account the
base rates of each protected attribute, and most importantly
3) disentangle the directions of ampliﬁcation.
As an example, consider a visual dataset (Fig. 1) where
each image has a label for the task T, which is painting
or not painting, and further is associated with a protected
attributeA, which is woman or man.2If the gender of
the person biases the prediction of the task, we consider
thisA!Tbias ampliﬁcation; if the reverse happens, then
T!A. Bias ampliﬁcation as it is currently being measured
merges together these two different paths which have differ-
ent normative implications and therefore demand different
remedies. This speaks to a larger problem of imprecision
when discussing problems of bias (Blodgett et al., 2020).
For example, “gender bias” can be vague; it is unclear if the
system is assigning gender in a biased way, or if there is a
disparity in model performance between different genders.
Both are harmful in different ways, but the conﬂation of
1The arrow is meant to signify the direction that bias ampliﬁca-
tion is ﬂowing, and not intended to be a claim about causality.
2We use the terms man andwoman to refer to binarized socially-
perceived (frequently annotator-inferred) gender expression, rec-
ognizing these labels are not inclusive and may be inaccurate.arXiv:2102.12594v2  [cs.LG]  7 Jun 2021
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Figure 1. Consider an image dataset where the goal is to classify the task, T, as painting or not painting, and the attribute, A, as woman or
man. Women are correlated with painting, and men with not painting. In this work we are particularly concerned with errors contributing
to the ampliﬁcation of bias, i.e., existing training correlations (yellow and red in the ﬁgure). We further disentangle these errors into those
that amplify the attribute to task correlation (i.e., incorrectly predict the task based on the person’s attribute; shown in yellow) versus those
that amplify the task to attribute (shown in red).
these biases can lead to misdirected solutions.
Bias ampliﬁcation analysis. The notion of bias ampliﬁca-
tion allows us to encapsulate the idea that systemic harms
and biases can be more harmful than errors made without
such a history (Bearman et al., 2009). For example, in
images, overclassifying women as cooking carries a more
negative connotation than overclassifying men as cooking.
The distinction of which errors are more harmful can often
be determined by lifting the patterns from the training data.
In our analysis and normative discussion, we look into this
and other implications through a series of experiments. We
consider whether predicting protected attributes is necessary
in the ﬁrst place; by not doing so, we can trivially remove
T!Aampliﬁcation. We also encourage the use of conﬁ-
dence intervals because BiasAmp!, along with other fair-
ness metrics, suffers from the Rashomon Effect (Breiman,
2001), or multiplicity of good models. In other words, in
supervised machine learning, random seeds have relatively
little impact on accuracy ; in contrast, they appear to have a
greater impact on fairness.
Notably, a trait of bias ampliﬁcation is that it is not at odds
with accuracy. Bias ampliﬁcation measures the model’s
errors, so a model with perfect accuracy will have perfect
(zero) bias ampliﬁcation. (Note nevertheless that the metrics
are not always correlated.) This differs from many other
fairness metrics, because the goal of not amplifying biases
and thus matching task-attribute correlations is aligned with
that of accurate predictions. For example, satisfying fairness
metrics like demographic parity (Dwork et al., 2012) are
incompatible with perfect accuracy when parity is not met
in the ground-truth. For the same reason bias ampliﬁcation
permits a classiﬁer with perfect accuracy, it also comes with
a set of limitations that are associated with treating data
correlations as the desired ground-truth, and thus make it
less appropriate for social applications where other metrics
are better suited for measuring a fair allocation of resources.Outline. To ground our work, we ﬁrst distinguish what bias
ampliﬁcation captures that standard fairness metrics cannot,
then distinguish BiasAmp!from BiasAmpMALS . Our key
contributions are: 1) proposing a new way to measure bias
ampliﬁcation, addressing multiple shortcomings of prior
work and allowing us to better diagnose models, and 2)
providing a comprehensive technical analysis and normative
discussion around the use of this measure in diverse settings,
encouraging thoughtfulness with each application.
2. Related Work
Fairness Measurements. Fairness is nebulous and context-
dependent, and approaches to quantifying it include equal-
ized odds (Hardt et al., 2016), equal opportunity (Hardt et al.,
2016), demographic parity (Dwork et al., 2012; Kusner
et al., 2017), fairness through awareness (Dwork et al., 2012;
Kusner et al., 2017), fairness through unawareness (Grgic-
Hlaca et al., 2016; Kusner et al., 2017), and treatment equal-
ity (Berk et al., 2017). We examine bias ampliﬁcation, a
type of group fairness where correlations are ampliﬁed.
As an example of what differentiates bias ampliﬁcation, we
present a scenario based on Fig. 1. We want to classify a per-
son whose attribute is man or woman with the task of paint-
ing or not. The majority groups “(painting, woman)” and
“(not painting, man)” each have 30 examples, and the minor-
ity groups “(not painting, woman)” and “(painting, man)”
each have 10. A classiﬁer trained to recognize painting on
this data is likely to learn these associations and over-predict
painting on images of women and under-predict painting
on images of men; however, algorithmic interventions may
counteract this and result in the opposite behavior. In Fig. 2
we show how four standard fairness metrics (in blue) vary
under different amounts of learned ampliﬁcation: FPR dif-
ference, TPR difference (Chouldechova, 2016; Hardt et al.,
2016), accuracy difference in task prediction (Berk et al.,
2017), and average mean-per-class accuracy across sub-
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Figure 2. Fairness metrics vary in how they respond to model
errors. In our image dataset (Fig. 1) of predicting someone who
is a woman or man to be painting or not, we consider a paint-
ing classiﬁer that always predicts the task correctly for men, but
varies for women. The x-axes correspond to the percentage of
women predicted to be painting, where the ground-truth is 0.75.
Below that the model is under-predicting women to be painting,
and above it the model is over-predicting. The two metrics in
the ﬁrst column, FPR and TPR difference, only capture one of
under- or over-prediction. The next two metrics in the second col-
umn, accuracy difference between attribute subgroups and average
mean-per-class accuracy across attribute subgroups, are symmetric
around 0.75, being unable to differentiate. Thus, the bias am-
pliﬁcation metrics in the last column are needed to distinguish
between under- and over-prediction ( BiasAmpMALS from Zhao
et al. (2017) in Sec. 3.2, and our proposed BiasAmpA!Tin Sec. 4).
BiasAmpMALS requires attribute predictions, so we assume per-
fect attribute prediction here to make the comparison.
groups (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). However, these four
metrics are not designed to account for the training correla-
tions, and unable to distinguish between cases of increased
or decreased learned correlations, motivating a need for a
measurement that can: bias ampliﬁcation.
Bias Ampliﬁcation. Bias ampliﬁcation has been measured
by looking at binary classiﬁcations without attributes (Leino
et al., 2019), GANs (Jain et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2020),
and correlations (Zhao et al., 2017; Jia et al., 2020). We
consider attributes in our formulation, which is a classiﬁ-
cation setting, and thus differs from GANs. We dissect in
detail the correlation work, and propose measuring condi-
tional correlations, which we term “directional.” Wang et al.
(2019) measures ampliﬁcation by predicting the sensitive
attribute from the model outputs, thus relying on multiple
target labels simultaneously; we propose a decomposable
metric to allow for more precise model diagnosis.
The Word Embedding Association Test (WEAT) (Caliskan
et al., 2017) measures bias ampliﬁcation in de-
contextualized word embeddings, speciﬁcally, non-
conditional correlations (Bolukbasi et al., 2016). However,
with newer models like BERT and ELMo that havecontextualized embeddings, WEAT does not work (May
et al., 2019), so new techniques have been proposed
incorporating context (Lu et al., 2019; Kuang & Davison,
2016). We use these models to measure the directional
aspect of ampliﬁcations, as well as to situate them in the
broader world of bias ampliﬁcation. Directionality of
ampliﬁcation has been observed (Stock & Cisse, 2018;
Qian et al., 2019), but we take a more systematic approach.
Causality. Bias ampliﬁcation is also studied in the causal
statistics literature (Bhattacharya & V ogt, 2007; Wooldridge,
2016; Pearl, 2010; 2011; Middleton et al., 2016). However,
despite the same terminology, the deﬁnitions and implica-
tions are largely distinct. Our work follows the machine
learning bias ampliﬁcation literature discussed in the pre-
vious section and focuses on the ampliﬁcation of socially-
relevant correlations in the training data.
Predictive Multiplicity. The Rashomon Effect (Breiman,
2001), or multiplicity of good models, has been studied
in various contexts. The variables investigated that differ
across good models include explanations (Hancox-Li, 2020),
individual treatments (Marx et al., 2020; Pawelczyk et al.,
2020), and variable importance (Fisher et al., 2019; Dong
& Rudin, 2019). We build on these and investigate how
fairness also differs between equally “good” models.
3. Existing Bias Ampliﬁcation Metric
We describe the existing metric (Zhao et al., 2017) and
highlight shortcomings that we address in Sec. 4.
3.1. Notation
LetAbe the set of protected demographic groups: for ex-
ample,A=fwoman, mangin Fig. 1.Aafora2A is
the binary random variable corresponding to the presence
of the group a; thusP(Awoman = 1) can be empirically
estimated as the fraction of images in the dataset contain-
ing women. Note that this formulation is generic enough
to allow for multiple protected attributes and intersecting
protected groups. Let Ttwitht2T similarly correspond
to binary target tasks, e.g., T=fpaintinggin Fig. 1.
3.2. Formulation and shortcomings
Using this notation, Zhao et al. (2017)’s metric is:
BiasAmpMALS =1
jTjX
a2A;t2Tyatat (1)
withyat= 1
P(Aa= 1jTt= 1)>1
jAj
at=P(^Aa= 1j^Tt= 1) P(Aa= 1jTt= 1)
where ^Aaand^Ttdenote model predictions for the protected
groupaand the target task trespectively. One attractive
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
property of this metric is that it doesn’t require any ground
truth test labels: assuming the training and test distributions
are the same, P(Aa= 1jTt= 1) can be estimated on the
training set, and P(^Aa= 1j^Tt= 1) relies only on the
predicted test labels. However, it also has a number of
shortcomings.
Shortcoming 1: The metric focuses only on positive cor-
relations. This may lead to numerical inconsistencies, es-
pecially in cases with multiple protected groups.
To illustrate, consider a scenario with 3 protected groups
A1,A2, andA3(disjoint; every person belongs to one), one
binary taskT, and the following dataset3:
•WhenA1= 1:10exs. ofT= 0and40exs. ofT= 1
•WhenA2= 1:40exs. ofT= 0and10exs. ofT= 1
•WhenA3= 1:10exs. ofT= 0and20exs. ofT= 1
From Eq. 1, we see y1= 1,y2= 0,y3= 0. Now consider a
model that always makes correct predictions of the protected
attribute ^Aa, always correctly predicts the target task when
A1= 1, but predicts ^T= 0wheneverA2= 1and^T= 1
wheneverA3= 1. Intuitively, this would correspond to a
case of overall learned bias ampliﬁcation. However, Eqn. 1
would measure bias ampliﬁcation as 0 since the strongest
positive correlation (in the A1= 1group) is not ampliﬁed.
Note that this issue doesn’t arise as prominently when there
are only 2 disjoint protected groups (binary attributes),
which was the case implicitly considered in Zhao et al.
(2017). However, even with two groups there are mis-
calibration concerns. For example, consider the dataset
above but only with the A1= 1 andA2= 1 examples.
A model that correctly predicts the protected attribute ^Aa,
correctly predicts the task on A1= 1, yet predicts ^T= 0
wheneverA2= 1would have bias ampliﬁcation value of
1=40
40 40
50= 0:2. However, a similar model that now
correctly predicts the task on A2= 1 but always predicts
^T= 1onA1= 1would have a much smaller bias ampliﬁ-
cation value of 1=50
60 40
50= 0:033, although intuitively
the amount of bias ampliﬁcation is the same.
Shortcoming 2: The chosen protected group may not be
correct due to imbalance between groups. To illustrate,
consider a scenario with 2 disjoint protected groups:
•WhenA1= 1:60exs. ofT= 0and30exs. ofT= 1
•WhenA2= 1:10exs. ofT= 0and20exs. ofT= 1
We calculate y1= 130
50>1
2
= 1 andy2= 0, even
though the correlation is actually the reverse. Now a model,
which always predicts ^Aacorrectly, but intuitively ampliﬁes
bias by predicting ^T= 0wheneverA1= 1and predicting
3For the rest of this subsection, for simplicity since we have
only one task, we drop the subscript tso that Tt,yatandat
become T,yaandarespectively. Further, assume the training
and test datasets have the same number of examples (exs.).^T= 1wheneverA2= 1would actually get a negative bias
ampliﬁcation score of0
30 30
50= 0:6.
BiasAmpMALS erroneously focuses on the protected group
with the most examples ( A1= 1) rather than on the pro-
tected group that is actually correlated with T= 1(A2= 1).
This situation manifests when min
1
jAj;P(Aa= 1)
<
P(Aa= 1jTt= 1)<max
1
jAj;P(Aa= 1)
, which
is more likely to arise as the the distribution of attribute
Aa= 1becomes more skewed.
Shortcoming 3: The metric entangles directions of bias
ampliﬁcation. By considering only the predictions rather
than the ground truth labels at test time, we are unable to
distinguish between errors stemming from ^Aaand those
from ^T. For example, looking at just the test predictions
we may know that the prediction pair ^T= 1;^A1= 1 is
overrepresented, but do not know whether this is due to
overpredicting ^T= 1on images with A1= 1or vice versa.
3.3. Experimental analysis
To verify that the above shortcomings manifest in practical
settings, we revisit the analysis of Zhao et al. (2017) on the
COCO (Lin et al., 2014) image dataset with two disjoint
protected groups Awoman andAman, and 66 binary target
tasks,Tt, corresponding to the presence of 66 objects in the
images. We directly use the released model predictions of
^Aaand^Ttfrom Zhao et al. (2017).
First, we observe that in COCO there are about 2.5x as many
men as women, leading to shortcoming 2 above. Consider
the object oven ;BiasAmpMALS calculatesP(Aman=
1jToven = 1) = 0:56>1
2and thus considers this to be
correlated with men rather than women. However, com-
putingP(Aman= 1;Toven = 1) = 0:0103<0:0129 =
P(Aman= 1)P(Toven= 1) reveals that men are in fact not
correlated with oven, and this result stems from the fact that
men are overrepresented in the dataset generally. Not sur-
prisingly, the model trained on this data associates women
with ovens and underpredicts men with ovens at test time,
i.e.,P(^Aman= 1j^Toven= 1) P(Aman= 1jToven= 1) =
 0:10, erroneously measuring negative bias ampliﬁcation.
In terms of directions of bias ampliﬁcation, we recall that
Zhao et al. (2017) discovers that “Technology oriented cat-
egories initially biased toward men such as keyboard ...
have each increased their bias toward males by over 0.100.”
Concretely, from Eqn. 1, P(Aman= 1jTkeyboard = 1) =
:70andP(^Aman= 1j^Tkeyboard = 1) =:83, demonstrating
an ampliﬁcation of bias. However, the direction or cause of
bias ampliﬁcation remains unclear: is the presence of man
in the image increasing the probability of predicting a key-
board, or vice versa? Looking more closely at the model’s
disentangled predictions, we see that when conditioning on
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
the attribute, P(^Tkeyboard = 1jAman= 1) = 0:0020<
0:0032 =P(Tkeyboard = 1jAman= 1) , and when condi-
tioning on the task, P(^Aman= 1jTkeyboard = 1) = 0:78>
0:70 =P(Aman= 1jTkeyboard = 1) , indicating that while
keyboards are under-predicted on images with men, men
are over-predicted on images with keyboards. Thus the root
cause of this ampliﬁcation appears to be in the gender pre-
dictor rather than the object detector. Such disentangement
allows us to properly focus algorithmic intervention efforts.
Finally, we make one last observation regarding the results
of Zhao et al. (2017). The overall bias ampliﬁcation is
measured to be :040. However, we observe that “man” is
being predicted at a higher rate (75.6%) than is actually
present (71.2%). With this insight, we tune the decision
threshold on the validation set such that the gender predic-
tor is well-calibrated to be predicting the same percentage
of images to have men as the dataset actually has. When
we calculate BiasAmpMALS on these newly thresholded
predictions for the test set, we see bias ampliﬁcation drop
from 0:040to0:001just as a result of this threshold change,
outperforming even the solution proposed in Zhao et al.
(2017) of corpus-level constraints, which achieved a drop to
only0:021. Fairness can be quite sensitive to the threshold
chosen (Chen & Wu, 2020), so careful threshold selection
should be done, rather than using a default of 0:5. When a
threshold is needed in our experiments, we pick it to be well-
calibrated on the validation set. In other words, we estimate
the expected proportion pof positive labels from the train-
ing set and choose a threshold such that on Nvalidation
examples, the Nphighest-scoring are predicted positive.
Although we do not take this approach, because at deploy-
ment time it is often the case that discrete predictions are
required, one could also imagine integrating bias ampliﬁca-
tion across threshold to have a threshold-agnostic measure
of bias ampliﬁcation, similar to what is proposed by Chen
& Wu (2020).
4. BiasAmp !(Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation)
Now we present our metric, BiasAmp!, which retains the
desirable properties of BiasAmpMALS , while addressing the
shortcomings noted in Section 3.2. To account for the need
to disentangle the two possible directions of bias ampliﬁ-
cation (shortcoming 3) the metric consists of two values:
BiasAmpA!Tcorresponds to the ampliﬁcation of bias re-
sulting from the protected attribute inﬂuencing the task pre-
diction, and BiasAmpT!Acorresponds to the ampliﬁcation
of bias resulting from the task inﬂuencing the protected
attribute prediction. Concretely, our directional bias ampliﬁ-
Table 1. Bias ampliﬁcation, as measured on the test set, changes
across three image conditions: original, noisy person mask, full
person mask. BiasAmpMALS misleadingly makes it appear as if
bias ampliﬁcation increases as the gender cues are removed. In
reality, A!T decreases with less visual attribute cues to bias the
task prediction, while it is T !A that increases as the model relies
on visual cues from the task to predict the attribute.
cation metric is:
BiasAmp!=1
jAjjTjX
a2A;t2Tyatat+ (1 yat)( at)
yat= 1[P(Aa= 1;Tt= 1)>P(Aa= 1)P(Tt= 1)]
at=8
>><
>>:P(^Tt= 1jAa= 1) P(Tt= 1jAa= 1)
if measuring A!T
P(^Aa= 1jTt= 1) P(Aa= 1jTt= 1)
if measuring T!A
(2)
The ﬁrst line generalizes BiasAmpMALS to include all at-
tributesAaand measure the ampliﬁcation of their positive
or negative correlations with task Tt(shortcoming 1). The
newyatidentiﬁes the direction of correlation of Aawith
Tt, properly accounting for base rates (shortcoming 2). Fi-
nally, atdecouples the two possible directions of bias
ampliﬁcation (shortcoming 3). Since values may be nega-
tive, reporting the aggregated bias ampliﬁcation value could
obscure attribute-task pairs that exhibit strong bias ampliﬁ-
cation; thus, disaggregated results per pair can be returned.
4.1. Experimental analysis
We verify that our metric successfully resolves the empirical
inconsistencies of Sec. 3.2. As expected, BiasAmpA!T
is positive at .1778 in shortcoming 1 and .3333 in 2;
BiasAmpT!Ais 0 in both. We further introduce a sce-
nario for empirically validating the decoupling aspect of
our metric. We use a baseline ampliﬁcation removal idea
of applying segmentation masks (noisy or full) over the
people in an image to mitigate bias stemming from human
attributes (Wang et al., 2019). We train on the COCO clas-
siﬁcation task, with the same 66 objects from Zhao et al.
(2017), a VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) model pre-
trained on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) to predict
objects and gender, with a Binary Cross Entropy Loss over
all outputs, and measure BiasAmpT!AandBiasAmpA!T;
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Figure 3. Illustrative captions from the Equalizer model (Hendricks
et al., 2018), which in these captions decreases T!Abias
ampliﬁcation from the Baseline, but inadvertently increases A!
T. Green underlined words are correct, and red italicized words are
incorrect. In the images, the Equalizer improves on the Baseline
for the gendered word, but introduces biased errors in the captions.
we report 95% conﬁdence intervals for 5 runs of each sce-
nario. In Tbl. 1 we see that, misleadingly, BiasAmpMALS
reports increased ampliﬁcation as gender cues are removed.
However what is actually happening is, as expected, that as
less of the person is visible, A !T decreases because there
are less human attribute visual cues to bias the task predic-
tion. It is T!A that increases because the model must lean
into task biases to predict the person’s attribute. However,
we can also see from the overlapping conﬁdence intervals
that the difference between noisy and full masks does not
appear to be particularly robust; we continue a discussion
of this phenomenon in Sec. 5.2.4
5. Analysis and Discussion
We now discuss some of the normative issues surrounding
bias ampliﬁcation: in Sec. 5.1 with the existence of T !A
bias ampliﬁcation, which implies the prediction of sensitive
attributes; in Sec. 5.2 about the need for conﬁdence intervals
to make robust conclusions; and in Sec. 5.3 about scenarios
in which the original formulation of bias ampliﬁcation as a
desire to match base correlations may not be the intention.
5.1. Considerations of T !A Bias Ampliﬁcation
If we think more deeply about these bias ampliﬁcations,
we might come to a normative conclusion that T!A,
which measures sensitive attribute predictions conditioned
on the tasks, should not exist in the ﬁrst place. There are
4This simultaneously serves as inspiration for an intervention
approach to mitigating bias ampliﬁcation. In Appendix A.4 we
provide a more granular analysis of this experiment, and how it
can help to inform mitigation. Further mitigation techniques are
outside of our scope, but we look to works like Singh et al. (2020);
Wang et al. (2019); Agarwal et al. (2020).very few situations in which predicting sensitive attributes
makes sense (Scheuerman et al., 2020; Larson, 2017), so
we should carefully consider if this is strictly necessary for
target applications. For the image domains discussed, by
simply removing the notion of predicting gender, we triv-
ially remove all T!Abias ampliﬁcation. In a similar
vein, there has been great work done on reducing gender
bias in image captions (Hendricks et al., 2018; Tang et al.,
2020), but it is often focused on targeting T!Arather than
A!Tampliﬁcation. When disentangling the directions
of bias, we ﬁnd that the Equalizer model (Hendricks et al.,
2018), which was trained with the intention of increasing
the quality of gender-speciﬁc words in captions, inadver-
tently increases A!Tbias ampliﬁcation for certain tasks.
We treat gender as the attribute and the objects as different
tasks. In Fig. 3 we see examples where the content of the
Equalizer’s caption exhibits bias coming from the person’s
attribute. Even though the Equalizer model reduces T!A
bias ampliﬁcation in these images, it inadvertently increases
A!T. It is important to disentangle the two directions of
bias and notice that while one direction is becoming more
fair, another is actually becoming more biased. Although
this may not always be the case, depending on the down-
stream application (Bennett et al., 2021), perhaps we could
consider simply replacing all instances of gendered words
like “man” and “woman” in the captions with “person” to
trivially eliminate T!A, and focus on A!Tbias ampli-
ﬁcation. Speciﬁcally when gender is the sensitive attribute,
Keyes (2018) thoroughly explains how we should carefully
think about why we might implement Automatic Gender
Recognition (AGR), and avoid doing so.
On the other hand, sensitive attribute labels, ideally from
self-disclosure, can be very useful. For example, these labels
are necessary to measure A!Tampliﬁcation, which is
important to discover, as we do not want our prediction task
to be biased for or against people with certain attributes.
5.2. Variance in Estimator Bias
Evaluation metrics, ours included, are speciﬁc to each model
on each dataset. Under common loss functions such as cross
entropy loss, some evaluation metrics like average preci-
sion are not very sensitive to random seed. However, bias
ampliﬁcation, along with other fairness metrics like FPR
difference, often ﬂuctuates greatly across runs. Because the
loss functions that machine learning practitioners tend to
default to using are proxies for accuracy, it makes sense
that various local minima, while equal in accuracy, are not
necessarily equal for other measurements. The phenomena
of differences between equally predictive models has been
termed the Rashomon Effect (Breiman, 2001), or predictive
multiplicity (Marx et al., 2020).
Thus, like previous work (Fisher et al., 2019), we urge
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
transparency, and advocate for the inclusion of conﬁdence
intervals. To illustrate the need for this, we look at the facial
image domain of CelebA (Liu et al., 2015), deﬁning two
different scenarios of the classiﬁcation of big nose or
young as our task, and treating the gender labels as our
attribute. Note that we do not classify gender, for reasons
raised in Sec. 5.1, so we only measure A!Tampliﬁcation.
For these tasks, women are correlated with no big nose and
being young, and men with big nose and not being young.
We examine two different scenarios, one where our inde-
pendent variable is model architecture, and another where
it is the ratio between number of images of the majority
groups (e.g., young women and not young men) and mi-
nority groups (e.g., not young women and young men). By
looking at the conﬁdence intervals, we can determine which
condition allows us to draw reliable conclusions about the
impact of that variable on bias ampliﬁcation.
For model architecture, we train 3 models pretrained
on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) across 5 runs:
ResNet18 (He et al., 2016), AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012), and VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014). Train-
ing details are in Appendix A.2. In Fig. 4 we see from
the conﬁdence intervals that while model architecture does
not result in differing enough of bias ampliﬁcation to con-
clude anything about the relative fairness of these models,
across-ratio differences are signiﬁcant enough to draw con-
clusions about the impact of this ratio on bias ampliﬁcation.
We encourage researchers to include conﬁdence intervals
so that ﬁndings are more robust to random ﬂuctuations.
Concurrent work covers this multiplicity phenomenon in
detail (D’Amour et al., 2020), and calls for more application-
speciﬁc speciﬁcations that would constrain the model space.
However, that may not always be feasible, so for now our
proposal of error bars is more general and immediately im-
plementable. In a survey of recently published fairness
papers from prominent machine learning conferences, we
found that 25 of 48 (52%) reported results of a fairness met-
ric without error bars (details in Appendix A.2. Even if the
model itself is deterministic, error bars could be generated
through bootstrapping (Efron, 1992) to account for the fact
that the test set itself is but a sample of the population, or
varying the train-test splits (Friedler et al., 2019).
5.3. Limitations of Bias Ampliﬁcation
An implicit assumption that motivates bias ampliﬁcation
metrics, including ours, is that the ground truth exists and
is known. Further, a perfectly accurate model can be con-
sidered perfectly fair, despite the presence of task-attribute
correlations in the training data. This allows us to treat the
disparity between the correlations in the input vs correla-
tions in the output as a fairness measure.
It follows that bias ampliﬁcation would notbe a good way tomeasure fairness when the ground truth is either unknown
or does not correspond to desired classiﬁcation. In this
section, we discuss two types of applications where bias
ampliﬁcation should not necessarily be used out-of-the-box
as a fairness metric.
Sentence completion: no ground truth. Consider the ﬁll-
in-the-blank NLP task, where there is no ground truth for
how to ﬁll in a sentence. Given “The [blank] went on a
walk”, a variety of words could be suitable. Therefore,
to measure bias ampliﬁcation in this setting, we need to
subjectively set the base correlations, i.e., P(Tt= 1jAa=
1);P(Aa= 1jTt= 1) .
To see the effect of adjusting base correlations, we test
the bias ampliﬁcation between occupations and gender pro-
nouns, conditioning on the pronoun and ﬁlling in the occu-
pation and vice versa. In Tbl. 2, we report our measured
bias ampliﬁcation results on the FitBERT (Fill in the blanks
BERT) (Havens & Stal, 2019; Devlin et al., 2019) model
using various sources as our base correlation of bias from
which ampliﬁcation is measured. The same outputs from
the model are used for each set of pronouns, and the in-
dependent variable we manipulate is the source of base
correlations: 1) equality amongst the pronouns, using two
pronouns (he/she) 2) equality amongst the pronouns, using
three pronouns (he/she/they) 3) co-occurrence counts from
English Wikipedia (one of the datasets BERT was trained
on), and 4) WinoBias (Zhao et al., 2018) with additional
information supplemented from the 2016 U.S. Labor Force
Statistics data. Additional details are in Appendix A.3.
We ﬁnd that relative to U.S. Labor Force data on these
particular occupations, FitBERT actually exhibits no bias
ampliﬁcation. Yet it would be simplistic to conclude that
FitBERT presents no fairness concerns with respect to gen-
der and occupation. For one, it is evident from Fig. 5 that
there is an overall bias towards “he” (this translates to a bias
ampliﬁcation for some occupations and a bias reduction for
others; the effects roughly cancel out in our bias ampliﬁca-
tion metric when aggregated). More importantly, whether
U.S. labor statistics are the right source of base correlations
depends on the speciﬁc application of the model and the
cultural context in which it is deployed. This is clear when
noticing that the measured BiasAmpT!Ais much stronger
when the gender distribution is expected to be uniform, in-
stead of gender-biased Labor statistics.
Risk prediction: future outcomes unknown. Next, we
examine the criminal risk prediction setting. A common
statistical task in this setting is predicting the likelihood a
defendant will commit a crime if released pending trial. This
setting has two important differences compared to computer
vision detection tasks: 1) The training labels typically come
from arrest records and suffer from problems like historical
and selection bias (Suresh & Guttag, 2019; Olteanu et al.,
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Figure 4. We investigate the consistency of various metrics by looking at 95% conﬁdence intervals as we manipulate two independent
variables: model architecture (left three graphs), and majority to minority groups ratio (right graph). The top row (blue) is for the attribute
ofbig nose , and bottom row (orange) is for young . For model architecture, across 5 runs, the accuracy measure of average precision
retains a consistent ranking across models, but two different fairness measures (FPR difference and A!Tbias ampliﬁcation) have
overlapping intervals. This does not allow us to draw conclusions about the differing fairness of these models. However, across-ratio
differences in bias ampliﬁcation are signiﬁcant enough to allow us to draw conclusions about the differing levels of fairness.
Figure 5. Each point represents an occupation’s probability at be-
ing associated with the pronoun for a man. FitBERT perpetuates
gender-occupation biases seen in the U.S. Labor Force, and addi-
tionally over-favors the pronoun for men.
2019; Green, 2020), and 2) the task is to predict future events
and thus the outcome is not knowable at prediction time.
Further, the risk of recidivism is not a static, immutable
trait of a person. Given the input features that are used to
represent individuals, one could imagine an individual with
a set of features who does recidivate, and one who does
not. In contrast, for a task like image classiﬁcation, two
instances with the same pixel values will always have the
same labels (if the ground truth labels are accurate).
As a result of these setting differences, risk prediction tools
may be considered unfair even if they exhibit no bias ampli-
ﬁcation. Indeed, one might argue that a model that shows
no bias ampliﬁcation is necessarily unfair as it perpetuates
past biases reﬂected in the training data. Further, modeling
risk as immutable misses the opportunity for intervention to
change the risk (Barabas et al., 2018). Thus, matching the
training correlations should not be the intended goal (Wick
et al., 2019; Hebert-Johnson et al., 2018).
To make this more concrete, in Fig. 6 we show the metrics
ofBiasAmpA!Tand False Positive Rate (FPR) disparityBase Correlation
Source (# pronouns)BiasAmpT!A BiasAmpA!T
Uniform (2) .1368.0226 .0084.0054
Uniform (3) .0914.0151 .0056.0036
Wikipedia (2) .0372.0307 -.0002.0043
2016 U.S. Labor
Force (WinoBias) (2)-.1254.0026 -.0089.0054
Table 2. BiasAmp!for different base correlation sources. The
value-laden choice of base correlation source depends on the down-
stream application.
measured on COMPAS predictions (Angwin et al., 2016),
only looking at two racial groups, for various values of the
risk threshold. A false positive occurs when a defendant
classiﬁed as high risk but does not recidivate; FPR disparity
has been interpreted as measuring how unequally different
groups suffer the costs of the model’s errors (Hardt et al.,
2016). The ﬁgure shows that bias ampliﬁcation is close to 0
for almost all thresholds. This is no surprise since the model
was designed to be calibrated by group (Flores et al., 2016).
However, for all realistic values of the threshold, there is a
large FPR disparity. Thus, risk prediction is a setting where
a lack of bias ampliﬁcation should not be used to conclude
that a model is fair.
Like any fairness metric, ours captures only one perspective,
which is that of not amplifying already present biases. It
does not require a correction for these biases. Settings that
bias ampliﬁcation are more suited for include those with
a known truth in the labels, where matching them would
desired. For example, applicable contexts include certain
social media bot detection tasks where the sensitive attribute
is the region of origin, as bot detection methods may be
biased against names from certain areas. More broadly, it
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Figure 6. COMPAS risk predictions exhibit FPR disparities, but
little bias ampliﬁcation. Bias ampliﬁcation measures only whether
the model matches the (biased) training data, not the bias of the
overall system.
is crucial that we pick fairness metrics thoughtfully when
deciding how to evaluate a model.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we take a deep dive into the measure of bias
ampliﬁcation. We introduce a new metric, BiasAmp!, that
disentangles the directions of bias to provide more action-
able insights when diagnosing models. Additionally, we
analyze and discuss normative considerations to encourage
exercising care when determining which fairness metrics are
applicable, and what assumptions they are encoding. The
mission of this paper is not to tout bias ampliﬁcation as the
optimal fairness metric, but rather to give a comprehensive
and critical study as to how it should be measured.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under Grant No. 1763642. We
thank Sunnie S. Y . Kim, Karthik Narasimhan, Vikram Ra-
maswamy, Brandon Stewart, and Felix Yu for feedback.
We especially thank Arvind Narayanan for signiﬁcant com-
ments and advice. We also thank the authors of Men Also
Like Shopping (Zhao et al., 2017) and Women Also Snow-
board (Hendricks et al., 2018) for uploading their model
outputs and code online in a way that made it easily repro-
ducible, and for being prompt and helpful in response to
clariﬁcations.
References
Agarwal, V ., Shetty, R., and Fritz, M. Towards causal VQA:
Revealing and reducing spurious correlations by invariant
and covariant semantic editing. Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020.
Angwin, J., Larson, J., Mattu, S., and Kirchner, L. Machine
bias. Propublica , 2016.Barabas, C., Dinakar, K., Ito, J., Virza, M., and Zittrain,
J. Interventions over predictions: Reframing the ethical
debate for actuarial risk assessment. Fairness, Account-
ability and Transparency in Machine Learning , 2018.
Bearman, S., Korobov, N., and Thorne, A. The fabric of
internalized sexism. Journal of Integrated Social Sciences
1(1): 10-47 , 2009.
Bennett, C. L., Gleason, C., Scheuerman, M. K., Bigham,
J. P., Guo, A., and To, A. “it’s complicated”: Negoti-
ating accessibility and (mis)representation in image de-
scriptions of race, gender, and disability. Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) , 2021.
Berk, R., Heidari, H., Jabbari, S., Kearns, M., and Roth, A.
Fairness in criminal justice risk assessments: The state of
the art. Sociological Methods and Research , 2017.
Bhattacharya, J. and V ogt, W. B. Do instrumental variables
belong in propensity scores? NBER Technical Working
Papers 0343, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc., 2007.
Blodgett, S. L., Barocas, S., III, H. D., and Wallach, H.
Language (technology) is power: A critical survey of
“bias” in nlp. Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL) , 2020.
Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K.-W., Zou, J., Saligrama, V ., and
Kalai, A. Man is to computer programmer as woman is to
homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2016.
Breiman, L. Statistical modeling: The two cultures. Statisti-
cal Science , 16:199–231, 2001.
Buolamwini, J. and Gebru, T. Gender shades: Intersectional
accuracy disparities in commercial gender classiﬁcation.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 81, 2018.
Caliskan, A., Bryson, J. J., and Narayanan, A. Seman-
tics derived automatically from language corpora contain
human-like biases. Science , 2017.
Chen, M. and Wu, M. Towards threshold invariant fair
classiﬁcation. Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (UAI) , 2020.
Choi, K., Grover, A., Singh, T., Shu, R., and Ermon,
S. Fair generative modeling via weak supervision.
arXiv:1910.12008 , 2020.
Chouldechova, A. Fair prediction with disparate impact:
A study of bias in recidivism prediction instrument. Big
Data , 2016.
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
D’Amour, A., Heller, K., Moldovan, D., Adlam, B., Ali-
panahi, B., Beutel, A., Chen, C., Deaton, J., Eisenstein,
J., Hoffman, M. D., Hormozdiari, F., Houlsby, N., Hou,
S., Jerfel, G., Karthikesalingam, A., Lucic, M., Ma, Y .,
McLean, C., Mincu, D., Mitani, A., Montanari, A., Nado,
Z., Natarajan, V ., Nielson, C., Osborne, T. F., Raman,
R., Ramasamy, K., Sayres, R., Schrouff, J., Seneviratne,
M., Sequeira, S., Suresh, H., Veitch, V ., Vladymyrov,
M., Wang, X., Webster, K., Yadlowsky, S., Yun, T.,
Zhai, X., and Sculley, D. Underspeciﬁcation presents
challenges for credibility in modern machine learning.
arXiv:2011.03395 , 2020.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-
guage understanding. Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-
HLT) , 2019.
Dong, J. and Rudin, C. Variable importance clouds: A way
to explore variable importance for the set of good models.
arXiv:1901.03209 , 2019.
Dwork, C., Hardt, M., Pitassi, T., Reingold, O., and Zemel,
R. Fairness through awareness. Proceedings of the 3rd
Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference ,
2012.
Efron, B. Bootstrap methods: another look at the jackknife.
InBreakthroughs in statistics , pp. 569–593. Springer,
1992.
Fisher, A., Rudin, C., and Dominici, F. All models are
wrong, but many are useful: Learning a variable’s impor-
tance by studying an entire class of prediction models
simultaneously. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
20, 2019.
Flores, A. W., Bechtel, K., and Lowenkamp, C. T. False
positives, false negatives, and false analyses: A rejoin-
der to ”machine bias: There’s software used across the
country to predict future criminals. and it’s biased against
blacks.”. Federal Probation Journal , 80, 2016.
Foulds, J., Islam, R., Keya, K. N., and Pan, S. An intersec-
tional deﬁnition of fairness. arXiv:1807.08362 , 2018.
Friedler, S. A., Scheidegger, C., Venkatasubramanian, S.,
Choudhary, S., Hamilton, E. P., and Roth, D. A compara-
tive study of fairness-enhancing interventions in machine
learning. Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency (FAccT) , 2019.
Green, B. The false promise of risk assessments: Epis-
temic reform and the limits of fairness. ACM Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (ACM
FAccT) , 2020.Grgic-Hlaca, N., Zafar, M. B., Gummadi, K. P., and Weller,
A. The case for process fairness in learning: Feature
selection for fair decision making. NeurIPS Symposium
on Machine Learning and the Law , 2016.
Hancox-Li, L. Robustness in machine learning explanations:
Does it matter? Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency (FAccT) , 2020.
Hardt, M., Price, E., and Srebro, N. Equality of opportunity
in supervised learning. arXiv:1610.02413 , 2016.
Havens, S. and Stal, A. Use BERT to ﬁll in
the blanks, 2019. URL https://github.com/
Qordobacode/fitbert .
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual
learning for image recognition. European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2016.
Hebert-Johnson, U., Kim, M. P., Reingold, O., and Roth-
blum, G. N. Multicalibration: Calibration for the
(computationally-identiﬁable) masses. International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2018.
Hendricks, L. A., Burns, K., Saenko, K., Darrell, T., and
Rohrbach, A. Women also snowboard: Overcoming bias
in captioning models. European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV) , 2018.
Hugsy. English adjectives. https:
//gist.github.com/hugsy/
8910dc78d208e40de42deb29e62df913 , 2017.
Jain, N., Olmo, A., Sengupta, S., Manikonda, L., and Kamb-
hampati, S. Imperfect imaganation: Implications of
gans exacerbating biases on facial data augmentation and
snapchat selﬁe lenses. arXiv:2001.09528 , 2020.
Jia, S., Meng, T., Zhao, J., and Chang, K.-W. Mitigat-
ing gender bias ampliﬁcation in distribution by posterior
regularization. Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2020.
Keyes, O. The misgendering machines: Trans/HCI impli-
cations of automatic gender recognition. Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 2018.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. Ima-
genet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural net-
works. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS) , pp. 1097–1105, 2012.
Kuang, S. and Davison, B. D. Semantic and context-aware
linguistic model for bias detection. Proc. of the Natural
Language Processing meets Journalism IJCAI-16 Work-
shop , 2016.
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Kusner, M. J., Loftus, J. R., Russell, C., and Silva, R. Coun-
terfactual fairness. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017.
Larson, B. N. Gender as a variable in natural-language
processing: Ethical considerations. Proceedings of the
First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Pro-
cessing , 2017.
Leino, K., Black, E., Fredrikson, M., Sen, S., and Datta, A.
Feature-wise bias ampliﬁcation. International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2019.
Liang, P. P., Li, I. M., Zheng, E., Lim, Y . C., Salakhutdi-
nov, R., and Morency, L.-P. Towards debiasing sentence
representations. Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2020.
Lin, T.-Y ., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Bourdev, L., Girshick,
R., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D., Zitnick, C. L., and
Dollar, P. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context.
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2014.
Liu, Z., Luo, P., Wang, X., and Tang, X. Deep learning face
attributes in the wild. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , December 2015.
Lu, K., Mardziel, P., Wu, F., Amancharla, P., and Datta,
A. Gender bias in neural natural language processing.
arXiv:1807.11714 , 2019.
Marx, C. T., du Pin Calmon, F., and Ustun, B. Predictive
multiplicity in classiﬁcation. arXiv:1909.06677 , 2020.
May, C., Wang, A., Bordia, S., Bowman, S. R., and
Rudinger, R. On measuring social biases in sentence
encoders. Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NACCL) , 2019.
Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K., and
Galstyan, A. A survey on bias and fairness in machine
learning. arXiv:1908.09635 , 2019.
Middleton, J. A., Scott, M. A., Diakow, R., and Hill, J. L.
Bias ampliﬁcation and bias unmasking. Political Analysis ,
3:307–323, 2016.
of Labor Statistics, U. B. Employed persons by detailed
occupation, sex, race, and hispanic or latino ethnic-
ity. 2016. URL https://www.bls.gov/cps/
aa2016/cpsaat11.pdf .
Olteanu, A., Castillo, C., Diaz, F., and Kiciman, E. Social
data: Biases, methodological pitfalls, and ethical bound-
aries. Frontiers in Big Data , 2019.Pawelczyk, M., Broelemann, K., and Kasneci, G. On coun-
terfactual explanations under predictive multiplicity. Con-
ference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI) ,
2020.
Pearl, J. On a class of bias-amplifying variables that endan-
ger effect estimates. Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
2010.
Pearl, J. Invited commentary: Understanding bias ampliﬁ-
cation. American Journal of Epidemiology , 174, 2011.
Qian, Y ., Muaz, U., Zhang, B., and Hyun, J. W. Reducing
gender bias in word-level language models with a gender-
equalizing loss function. ACL-SRW , 2019.
Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S.,
Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla, A., Bernstein,
M., Berg, A. C., and Fei-Fei, L. ImageNet Large Scale
Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of
Computer Vision (IJCV) , 115(3):211–252, 2015. doi:
10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Scheuerman, M. K., Wade, K., Lustig, C., and Brubaker,
J. R. How we’ve taught algorithms to see identity: Con-
structing race and gender in image databases for facial
analysis. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction , 2020.
Simonyan, K. and Zisserman, A. Very deep convo-
lutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
Singh, K. K., Mahajan, D., Grauman, K., Lee, Y . J., Feiszli,
M., and Ghadiyaram, D. Don’t judge an object by its con-
text: Learning to overcome contextual bias. Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,
2020.
Stock, P. and Cisse, M. ConvNets and ImageNet beyond
accuracy: Understanding mistakes and uncovering biases.
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2018.
Suresh, H. and Guttag, J. V . A framework for under-
standing unintended consequences of machine learning.
arXiv:1901.10002 , 2019.
Tang, R., Du, M., Li, Y ., Liu, Z., and Hu, X. Mitigating
gender bias in captioning systems. arXiv:2006.08315 ,
2020.
Wang, T., Zhao, J., Yatskar, M., Chang, K.-W., and Or-
donez, V . Balanced datasets are not enough: Estimating
and mitigating gender bias in deep image representations.
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,
2019.
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Wick, M., Panda, S., and Tristan, J.-B. Unlocking fairness:
a trade-off revisited. Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2019.
Wooldridge, J. M. Should instrumental variables be used as
matching variables? Research in Economics , 70:232–237,
2016.
Zhao, J., Wang, T., Yatskar, M., Ordonez, V ., and Chang,
K.-W. Men also like shopping: Reducing gender bias
ampliﬁcation using corpus-level constraints. Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) , 2017.
Zhao, J., Wang, T., Yatskar, M., Ordonez, V ., and Chang,
K.-W. Gender bias in coreference resolution: Evalua-
tion and debiasing methods. North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) ,
2018.
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
A. Appendix
A.1. Additional Metric Details
We provide additional details here about BiasAmp!, as deﬁned in Sec. 4.
In practice the indicator variable, yat, is computed over the statistics of the training set, whereas everything else is computed
over the test set. The reason behind this is that the direction of bias is determined by the existing biases in the training set.
Comparisons of the values outputted by BiasAmp!should only be done relatively. In particular, within one of the directions
at a time, either A!TorT!A, on one dataset. Comparing A!TtoT!Adirectly is not a signal as to which
direction of ampliﬁcation is stronger.
A.2. Details and Experiment from Variance in Estimator Bias
For the models we trained in Sec. 5.2, we performed hyperparameter tuning on the validation set, and ended up using the
following: ResNet18 had a learning rate of .0001, AlexNet of .0003, and VGG16 of .00014. All models were trained with
stochastic gradient descent, a batch size of 64, and 10 epochs. We use the given train-validation-test split from the CelebA
dataset.
Our method for surveying prominent fairness papers is as follows: on Google Scholar we performed a search for papers
containing the keywords of “fair”, “fairness”, or “bias” from the year 2015 onwards, sorted by relevance. We did this for the
three conferences of 1) Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2) International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), and 3) ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT). We picked
these conferences because of their high reputability as machine learning conferences, and thus would serve as a good upper
bound for reporting error bars on fairness evaluation metrics. We also looked at the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), but the Google Scholar search turned up very few papers on fairness. From the three conferences
we ended up querying, we took the ﬁrst 25 papers from each, pruning those that were either: 1) not related to fairness, or 2)
not containing fairness metrics for which it error bars could be relevant (e.g., theoretical or philosophical papers). Among
the 48 papers that were left of the 75, if there was at least one graph or table containing a fairness metric that did not appear
to be fully deterministic, and no error bars were included (even if the number reported was a mean across multiple runs),
this was marked to be a “non-error-bar” paper, of which 25 of the 48 papers looked into met this criteria.
A.3. Details on Measuring Bias Ampliﬁcation in FitBERT
Here we provide additional details behind the numbers presented in Tbl. 2 in Sec. 5.3.
As noted, and done, by (Liang et al., 2020), a large and diverse corpus of sentences is needed to sample from the large
variety of contexts. However, that is out of scope for this work, where we run FitBERT on 20 sentence templates of the
form “[1) he/she/(they)] [2) is/was] a(n) [3) adjective] [4) occupation]”. By varying 2) and using the top 10 most frequent
adjectives from a list of adjectives (Hugsy, 2017) that appear in the English Wikipedia dataset (one of the datasets BERT
was trained on) that would be applicable as a descriptor for an occupation (pruning adjectives like e.g., “which”, “left”) for
3), we end up with 20 template sentences. We then alternate conditioning on 1) (to calculate A !T) and 4) (to calculate
T!A). The 10 adjectives we ended up wtih are: new, known, single, large, small, major, French, old, short, good. We use
the output probabilities rather than discrete predictions in calculating P(^Aa= 1jTt= 1) andP(^Tt= 1jAa= 1) because
there is no “right” answer in sentence completion, in contrast to object prediction, and so we want the output distribution.
When calculating the amount of bias ampliﬁcation when the base rates are equal, we picked the direction of bias based on
that provided by the WinoBias dataset. In practice, this can be thought of as setting the base correlation, P(Aa= 1jTt= 1)
for a men-biased job like “cook” to be :5 +for “he” and :5 for “she” when there are two pronouns, and :33 +for “he”
and:33 for “she” and “they”, where in practice we used = 1e 7. This ensures that the indicator variable, yatfrom Eq.
2, is set in the direction fo the gender bias, but the magnitudes of atare not affected to a signiﬁcant degree.
To generate a rough approximation of what training correlation rates could look like in this domain, we look to one of
the datasets that BERT was trained on, the Wikipedia dataset. We do so by simply counting the cooccurrences of all the
occupations along with gendered words such as “man”, “he”, “him”, etc. There are ﬂaws with this approach because
in a sentence like “She went to see the doctor.”, the pronoun is in fact not referring to the gender of the person with the
occupation. However, we leave a more accurate measurement of this to future work, as our aim for showing these results was
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
more for demonstrative purposes illustrating the manipulation of the correlation rate, rather than in rigorously measuring the
training correlation rate.
We use 32 rather than 40 occupations in WinoBias (Zhao et al., 2018), because when we went to the 2016 U.S. Labor Force
Statistics data (of Labor Statistics, 2016) to collect the actual numbers of each gender and occupation in order to be able to
calculateP(Tt= 1jAa= 1) , since WinoBias only had P(Aa= 1jTt= 1) , we found 8 occupations to be too ambiguous
to be able to determine the actual numbers. For example, for “attendant”, there were many different attendant jobs listed,
such as “ﬂight attendants” and “parking lot attendant”, so we opted rather to drop these jobs from the list of 40. The 8 from
the original WinoBias dataset that we ignored are: supervisor, manager, mechanician, CEO, teacher, assistant, clerk, and
attendant. The ﬁrst four are biased towards men, and the latter four towards women, so that we did not skew the distribution
of jobs biased towards each gender.
A.4. COCO Masking Experiment Broken Down by Object
In Table 1 of Sec. 4 we perform an experiment whereby we measure the bias ampliﬁcation on COCO object detection
based on the amount of masking we apply to the people in the images. We ﬁnd that BiasAmpA!Tdecreases when we apply
masking, but BiasAmpT!Aincreases when we do so. To better inform mitigation techniques, it is oftentimes helpful to take
a more granular look at which objects are actually amplifying the bias. In Table 3 we provide such a granular breakdown. If
our goal is to target BiasAmpA!T, we might note that objects like tvshow decreasing bias ampliﬁcation when the person
is masked, while dining table stays relatively stagnant.
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Table 3. A breakdown of BiasAmpA!Tand BiasAmpT!Aby object for the masking experiment done on COCO in Table 1.
ObjectOriginal Noisy Person Mask Full Person Mask
A!TT!AA!TT!AA!TT!A
teddy bear 0:130:04 1:230:32 0:130:04 2:270:34 0:090:04 1:930:43
handbag 0:440:14 7:880:67 0:40:17 5:622:13 0:240:13 2:963:03
fork 0:620:22 7:671:31 0:630:18 7:451:65 0:760:24 6:220:62
cake 0:290:06 5:70:59 0:090:04 5:20:59 0:160:06 3:31:7
bed 0:010:04 1:331:43 0:060:08 5:331:43 0:090:03 6:670:0
umbrella 0:050:07 9:523:92 0:080:06 13:332:64 0:040:11 11:242:76
spoon 0:060:06 2:912:78 0:030:06 10:914:83 0:040:03 15:274:11
giraffe 0:210:13 5:321:51 0:20:05 4:052:46 0:020:04 4:951:34
bowl 0:280:04 2:21:02 0:060:07 4:82:56 0:180:12 7:42:26
knife 0:220:12 11:742:39 0:350:12 10:433:15 0:310:05 8:842:18
wine glass 0:410:14 5:240:83 0:620:09 7:143:49 0:690:07 10:953:64
dining table 0:750:14 4:531:02 0:760:14 3:182:12 0:740:17 4:581:38
cat 0:070:04 2:412:05 0:190:05 10:02:42 0:170:02 20:01:81
sink 0:180:15 4:292:4 0:110:07 5:032:6 0:120:1 3:191:5
cup 0:30:09 12:363:42 0:150:08 12:01:32 0:120:03 14:422:94
potted plant 0:210:18 6:365:1 0:340:07 0:02:82 0:320:08 4:552:52
refrigerator 0:060:03 9:61:36 0:070:06 7:471:75 0:010:03 12:04:25
microwave 0:010:02 3:55:3 0:010:03 13:013:32 0:030:03 6:09:05
couch 1:350:16 0:251:24 0:940:23 1:621:06 1:210:16 0:150:8
oven 0:070:09 7:671:73 0:330:12 10:673:0 0:030:13 13:121:49
sandwich 0:980:15 8:930:92 2:60:18 15:232:78 2:460:4 15:671:74
book 0:430:08 3:070:57 0:480:13 3:341:24 0:850:11 3:182:0
bottle 0:050:11 7:731:54 0:130:14 8:333:87 0:060:06 11:521:65
cell phone 0:090:13 3:61:92 0:050:15 13:720:89 0:10:12 18:722:36
pizza 0:190:1 6:851:81 0:090:03 15:172:41 0:380:12 9:31:56
banana 0:350:08 4:420:66 0:560:09 6:11:06 0:10:19 5:190:72
toothbrush 0:470:11 2:422:63 0:550:13 4:325:14 0:50:12 11:854:43
tennis
racket 0:090:08 9:223:05 0:00:09 14:752:74 0:090:12 14:751:38
chair 0:310:11 1:870:22 0:310:06 3:850:37 0:310:05 4:690:0
dog 0:140:04 0:430:19 0:30:07 1:60:29 0:30:04 1:70:35
donut 0:30:08 1:40:29 0:390:15 0:00:59 0:410:15 0:090:37
suitcase 0:430:08 1:961:12 0:090:01 7:30:65 0:110:14 8:431:4
laptop 0:270:07 4:583:57 0:060:04 7:676:33 0:10:06 17:395:52
hot dog 1:480:12 7:632:72 1:510:07 9:371:75 1:860:14 9:163:03
remote 0:330:02 9:142:73 0:150:09 11:032:59 0:150:07 18:623:12
clock 0:770:16 4:483:05 0:620:08 9:613:02 0:880:11 11:443:78
bench 0:020:05 11:493:61 0:060:06 14:684:73 0:040:06 16:62:61
tv 0:350:09 5:164:59 0:270:12 14:192:58 0:210:09 18:063:03
mouse 0:220:06 0:955:76 0:260:05 4:574:99 0:180:06 5:144:11
horse 0:070:03 8:135:17 0:110:07 13:631:96 0:160:04 16:594:92
ﬁre hydrant 0:210:07 4:712:98 0:150:07 1:764:64 0:180:06 5:06:19
keyboard 0:010:08 1:643:4 0:080:08 17:384:51 0:020:08 31:156:74
bus 0:020:04 11:332:15 0:170:07 9:03:53 0:10:04 3:06:62
toilet 0:260:06 7:654:07 0:20:09 12:174:15 0:190:06 17:225:67
person 0:040:1 1:474:54 0:10:07 4:125:25 0:030:08 3:534:65
trafﬁc light 0:20:03 4:442:48 0:270:06 6:061:86 0:270:11 11:522:28
sports ball 1:440:2 3:411:56 0:950:27 3:861:83 1:270:32 4:951:97
bicycle 0:230:07 13:582:02 0:010:15 13:093:98 0:210:08 12:721:83
car 0:20:2 3:71:49 0:570:1 0:742:2 0:320:1 0:372:66
backpack 0:010:03 7:571:63 0:00:06 17:843:09 0:050:04 18:382:53
Directional Bias Ampliﬁcation
Table 3. Continued
ObjectOriginal Noisy Person Mask Full Person Mask
A!TT!AA!TT!AA!TT!A
train 0:150:07 8:473:33 0:270:08 16:821:86 0:140:16 19:283:97
kite 0:090:04 2:673:35 0:160:07 7:563:4 0:220:05 4:893:78
cow 0:170:08 1:61:95 0:110:08 0:863:0 0:150:07 3:582:55
skis 0:120:09 0:242:13 0:250:03 1:313:01 0:230:1 7:51:76
truck 0:270:04 13:331:68 0:250:12 10:261:42 0:160:03 17:952:46
elephant 0:580:15 9:091:25 0:240:08 4:292:94 0:630:06 1:693:13
boat 0:030:05 2:81:79 0:020:07 0:02:48 0:050:05 3:23:06
frisbee 0:090:17 1:361:18 0:140:22 0:72:45 0:790:17 6:882:28
airplane 0:140:07 4:233:27 0:150:07 5:774:4 0:160:05 5:773:69
motorcycle 0:060:04 6:353:94 0:010:06 9:042:42 0:120:04 1:736:64
surfboard 0:020:05 3:834:79 0:060:07 1:741:36 0:080:06 2:434:83
tie 0:160:06 3:292:1 0:080:07 3:533:45 0:230:04 4:714:47
snowboard 0:40:13 10:052:1 0:530:16 9:641:0 0:410:22 7:91:7
baseball bat 0:460:04 3:722:47 0:450:1 3:361:8 0:230:12 1:242:17
baseball
glove 0:030:05 27:064:12 0:160:04 34:91:29 0:10:03 36:470:84
skateboard 0:280:03 11:373:51 0:340:08 10:983:86 0:350:11 5:883:77