Title: Automated Hate Speech Detection and the Problem of Offensive Language

Automated Hate Speech Detection and the Problem of Offensive Language
Thomas Davidson,1Dana Warmsley,2Michael Macy,1,3Ingmar Weber4
1Department of Sociology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY , USA
2Department of Applied Mathematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY , USA
3Department of Information Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY , USA
4Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU, Doha, Qatar
ftrd54, dw457, mwmacy g@cornell.edu, iweber@hbku.edu.qa
Abstract
A key challenge for automatic hate-speech detection on so-
cial media is the separation of hate speech from other in-
stances of offensive language. Lexical detection methods tend
to have low precision because they classify all messages con-
taining particular terms as hate speech and previous work us-
ing supervised learning has failed to distinguish between the
two categories. We used a crowd-sourced hate speech lexicon
to collect tweets containing hate speech keywords. We use
crowd-sourcing to label a sample of these tweets into three
categories: those containing hate speech, only offensive lan-
guage, and those with neither. We train a multi-class classi-
ﬁer to distinguish between these different categories. Close
analysis of the predictions and the errors shows when we can
reliably separate hate speech from other offensive language
and when this differentiation is more difﬁcult. We ﬁnd that
racist and homophobic tweets are more likely to be classiﬁed
as hate speech but that sexist tweets are generally classiﬁed
as offensive. Tweets without explicit hate keywords are also
more difﬁcult to classify.
Introduction
What constitutes hate speech and when does it differ from
offensive language? No formal deﬁnition exists but there is
a consensus that it is speech that targets disadvantaged so-
cial groups in a manner that is potentially harmful to them
(Jacobs and Potter 2000; Walker 1994). In the United States,
hate speech is protected under the free speech provisions of
the First Amendment, but it has been extensively debated in
the legal sphere and with regards to speech codes on college
campuses. In many countries, including the United King-
dom, Canada, and France, there are laws prohibiting hate
speech, which tends to be deﬁned as speech that targets mi-
nority groups in a way that could promote violence or social
disorder. People convicted of using hate speech can often
face large ﬁnes and even imprisonment. These laws extend
to the internet and social media, leading many sites to cre-
ate their own provisions against hate speech. Both Facebook
and Twitter have responded to criticism for not doing enough
to prevent hate speech on their sites by instituting policies
to prohibit the use of their platforms for attacks on people
This is a preprint of a short paper accepted at ICWSM 2017.
Please cite that version instead.based on characteristics like race, ethnicity, gender, and sex-
ual orientation, or threats of violence towards others.1
Drawing upon these deﬁnitions, we deﬁne hate speech
aslanguage that is used to expresses hatred towards a tar-
geted group or is intended to be derogatory, to humiliate,
or to insult the members of the group . In extreme cases this
may also be language that threatens or incites violence, but
limiting our deﬁnition only to such cases would exclude a
large proportion of hate speech. Importantly, our deﬁnition
does not include all instances of offensive language because
people often use terms that are highly offensive to certain
groups but in a qualitatively different manner. For example
some African Americans often use the term n*gga2in every-
day language online (Warner and Hirschberg 2012), people
use terms like h*eandb*tch when quoting rap lyrics, and
teenagers use homophobic slurs like f*gas they play video
games. Such language is prevalent on social media (Wang
et al. 2014), making this boundary condition crucial for any
usable hate speech detection system .
Previous work on hate speech detection has identiﬁed this
problem but many studies still tend to conﬂate hate speech
and offensive language. In this paper we label tweets into
three categories: hate speech, offensive language, or neither.
We train a model to differentiate between these categories
and then analyze the results in order to better understand
how we can distinguish between them. Our results show that
ﬁne-grained labels can help in the task of hate speech detec-
tion and highlights some of the key challenges to accurate
classiﬁcation. We conclude that future work must better ac-
count for context and the heterogeneity in hate speech usage.
Related Work
Bag-of-words approaches tend to have high recall but lead
to high rates of false positives since the presence of offen-
sive words can lead to the misclassiﬁcation of tweets as
hate speech (Kwok and Wang 2013; Burnap and Williams
1Facebook’s policy can be found here: www.facebook.
com/communitystandards#hate-speech . Twitter’s pol-
icy can be found here: support.twitter.com/articles/
20175050 .
2Where present, the “*” has been inserted by us and was not part
of the original text. All tweets quoted have been modiﬁed slightly
to protect user’s identities while retaining their original meaning.arXiv:1703.04009v1  [cs.CL]  11 Mar 2017
2015). Focusing on anti-black racism, Kwok and Wang ﬁnd
that 86% of the time the reason a tweet was categorized as
racist was because it contained offensive words. Given the
relatively high prevalence of offensive language and “curse
words” on social media this makes hate speech detection
particularly challenging (Wang et al. 2014). The difference
between hate speech and other offensive language is often
based upon subtle linguistic distinctions, for example tweets
containing the word n*gger are more likely to be labeled as
hate speech than n*gga (Kwok and Wang 2013). Many can
be ambiguous, for example the word gaycan be used both
pejoratively and in other contexts unrelated to hate speech
(Wang et al. 2014).
Syntactic features have been leveraged to better identify
the targets and intensity of hate speech, for example sen-
tences where a relevant noun and verb occur (e.g. killand
Jews ) (Gitari et al. 2015), the POS trigram “DT jewish NN”
(Warner and Hirschberg 2012), and the syntactic structure I
<intensity > <user intent > <hate target >, e.g. “I f*cking
hate white people” (Silva et al. 2016).
Other supervised approaches to hate speech classiﬁcation
have unfortunately conﬂated hate speech with offensive lan-
guage, making it difﬁcult to ascertain the extent to which
they are really identifying hate speech (Burnap and Williams
2015; Waseem and Hovy 2016). Neural language models
show promise in the task but existing work has used training
data has a similarly broad deﬁnition of hate speech (Djuric et
al. 2015). Non-linguistic features like the gender or ethnicity
of the author can help improve hate speech classiﬁcation but
this information is often unavailable or unreliable on social
media (Waseem and Hovy 2016).
Data
We begin with a hate speech lexicon containing words and
phrases identiﬁed by internet users as hate speech, com-
piled by Hatebase.org . Using the Twitter API we searched
for tweets containing terms from the lexicon, resulting in a
sample of tweets from 33,458 Twitter users. We extracted
the time-line for each user, resulting in a set of 85.4 mil-
lion tweets. From this corpus we then took a random sam-
ple of 25k tweets containing terms from the lexicon and had
them manually coded by CrowdFlower (CF) workers. Work-
ers were asked to label each tweet as one of three categories:
hate speech, offensive but not hate speech, or neither offen-
sive nor hate speech. They were provided with our deﬁni-
tion along with a paragraph explaining it in further detail.
Users were asked to think not just about the words appear-
ing in a given tweet but about the context in which they were
used. They were instructed that the presence of a particular
word, however offensive, did not necessarily indicate a tweet
is hate speech. Each tweet was coded by three or more peo-
ple. The intercoder-agreement score provided by CF is 92%.
We use the majority decision for each tweet to assign a la-
bel. Some tweets were not assigned labels as there was no
majority class. This results in a sample of 24,802 labeled
tweets.
Only 5% of tweets were coded as hate speech by the ma-
jority of coders and only 1.3% were coded unanimously,
demonstrating the imprecision of the Hatebase lexicon. Thisis much lower than a comparable study using Twitter, where
11.6% of tweets were ﬂagged as hate speech (Burnap and
Williams 2015), likely because we use a stricter criteria for
hate speech. The majority of the tweets were considered
to be offensive language (76% at 2/3, 53% at 3/3) and the
remainder were considered to be non-offensive (16.6% at
2/3, 11.8% at 3/3). We then constructed features from these
tweets and used them to train a classiﬁer.
Features
We lowercased each tweet and stemmed it using the Porter
stemmer,3then create bigram, unigram, and trigram fea-
tures, each weighted by its TF-IDF. To capture informa-
tion about the syntactic structure we use NLTK (Bird, Loper,
and Klein 2009) to construct Penn Part-of-Speech (POS) tag
unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams. To capture the quality of
each tweet we use modiﬁed Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level and
Flesch Reading Ease scores, where the number of sentences
is ﬁxed at one. We also use a sentiment lexicon designed for
social media to assign sentiment scores to each tweet (Hutto
and Gilbert 2014). We also include binary and count indica-
tors for hashtags, mentions, retweets, and URLs, as well as
features for the number of characters, words, and syllables
in each tweet.
Model
We ﬁrst use a logistic regression with L1 regularization to
reduce the dimensionality of the data. We then test a variety
of models that have been used in prior work: logistic regres-
sion, na ¨ıve Bayes, decision trees, random forests, and linear
SVMs. We tested each model using 5-fold cross validation,
holding out 10% of the sample for evaluation to help pre-
vent over-ﬁtting. After using a grid-search to iterate over the
models and parameters we ﬁnd that the Logistic Regression
and Linear SVM tended to perform signiﬁcantly better than
other models. We decided to use a logistic regression with
L2 regularization for the ﬁnal model as it more readily al-
lows us to examine the predicted probabilities of class mem-
bership and has performed well in previous papers (Burnap
and Williams 2015; Waseem and Hovy 2016). We trained
the ﬁnal model using the entire dataset and used it to predict
the label for each tweet. We use a one-versus-rest frame-
work where a separate classiﬁer is trained for each class and
the class label with the highest predicted probability across
all classiﬁers is assigned to each tweet. All modeling was
performing using scikit-learn (Pedregosa and others
2011).
Results
The best performing model has an overall precision 0.91,
recall of 0.90, and F1 score of 0.90. Looking at Figure 1 ,
however, we see that almost 40% of hate speech is misclas-
siﬁed: the precision and recall scores for the hate class are
0.44 and 0.61 respectively. Most of the misclassiﬁcation oc-
curs in the upper triangle of this matrix, suggesting that the
3We veriﬁed that the stemmer did not remove important in-
formation by reducing key terms to the same stem, e.g. f*gs and
f*ggots stem to f*gandf*ggot .
Figure 1: True versus predicted categories
Hate Offensive Neither
Predicted categoriesNeither Offensive HateTrue categories
0.02 0.03 0.950.05 0.91 0.040.61 0.31 0.09
model is biased towards classifying tweets as less hateful or
offensive than the human coders. Far fewer tweets are clas-
siﬁed as more offensive or hateful than their true category;
approximately 5% of offensive and 2% of innocuous tweets
have been erroneously classiﬁed as hate speech. To explore
why these tweets have been misclassiﬁed we now look more
closely at the tweets and their predicted classes.
Tweets with the highest predicted probabilities of being
hate speech tend to contain multiple racial or homophobic
slurs, e.g. @JuanYeez shut yo beaner ass up sp*c and hop
your f*ggot ass back across the border little n*gga andRT
@eBeZa: Stupid f*cking n*gger LeBron. You ﬂipping jun-
gle bunny monkey f*ggot . Other tweets tend to be correctly
identiﬁed as hate when they contained strongly racist or ho-
mophobic terms like n*gger andf*ggot . Interestingly, we
also ﬁnd cases where people use hate speech to respond
to other hate speakers, such as this tweet where someone
uses a homophobic slur to criticize someone else’s racism:
@MrMoonfrog @RacistNegro86 f*ck you, stupid ass cow-
ard b*tch f*ggot racist piece of sh*t .
Turning to true hate speech classiﬁed as offensive it ap-
pears that tweets with the highest predicted probability of
being offensive are genuinely less hateful and were per-
haps mislabeled, for example When you realize how cu-
riosity is a b*tch #CuriosityKilledMe may have been erro-
neously coded as hate speech if people thought that curios-
itywas a person, and Why no boycott of racist ”redskins”?
#Redskins #ChangeTheName contains a slur but is actually
against racism. It is likely that coders skimmed these tweets
too quickly, picking out words or phrases that appeared to
be hateful without considering the context. Turning to bor-derline cases, where the probability of being offensive is
marginally higher than hate speech, it appears that the ma-
jority are hate speech, both directed towards other Twitter
users, @MDreyfus @NatFascist88 Sh*t your ass your moms
p*ssy u Jew b*stard. Ur times coming. Heil Hitler! and gen-
eral hateful statements like My advice of the day: If your a
tranny...go f*ck your self! . These tweets ﬁt our deﬁnition of
hate speech but were likely misclassiﬁed because they do
not contain any of the terms most strongly associated with
hate speech. Finally, the hateful tweets incorrectly labeled
as neither tend not to contain hate or curse words, for exam-
pleIf some one isn’t an Anglo-Saxon Protestant, they have
no right to be alive in the US. None at all, they are foreign
ﬁlthcontains a negative term, ﬁlthbut no slur against a par-
ticular group. We also see that rarer types of hate speech,
for example this anti-Chinese statement Every slant in #LA
should be deported. Those scum have no right to be here.
Chinatown should be bulldozed , are incorrectly classiﬁed.
While the classiﬁer performs well at prevalent forms of hate
speech, particularly anti-black racism and homophobia, but
is less reliable at detecting types of hate speech that occur
infrequently, a problem noted by Nobata et al. (2016).
A key ﬂaw in much previous work is that offensive lan-
guage is mislabeled as hate speech due to an overly broad
deﬁnition. Our multi-class framework allows us to minimize
these errors; only 5% of our true offensive language was la-
beled as hate. The tweets correctly labeled as offensive tend
to contain curse words and often sexist language, e.g. Why
you worried bout that other h*e? Cuz that other h*e aint
worried bout another h*e andI knew Kendrick Lamar was
onto something when he said “I call a b*tch a b*tch, a h*e a
h*e, a woman a woman” . Many of these tweets contain sex-
ist terms like b*tch ,p*ssy , and h*e. Human coders appear to
consider racists or homophobic terms to be hateful but con-
sider words that are sexist and derogatory towards women
to be only offensive, consistent prior ﬁndings (Waseem and
Hovy 2016).
Looking at the tweets misclassiﬁed as hate speech we see
that many contain multiple slurs, e.g. @SmogBaby: These
h*es be lyin to all of us n*ggas andMy n*gga mister meaner
just hope back in the b*tch . While these tweets contain terms
that can be considered racist and sexist it is apparent than
many Twitter users use this type of language in their every-
day communications. When they do contain racist language
they tend to contain the term n*gga rather than n*gger , in
line with the ﬁndings of Kwok and Wang (2013). We also
found a few recurring phrases such as these h*es ain’t loyal
that were actually lyrics from rap songs that users were quot-
ing. Classiﬁcation of such tweets as hate speech leads us
to overestimate the prevalence of the phenomenon. While
our model still misclassiﬁes some offensive language as hate
speech we are able to avoid the vast majority of these errors
by differentiating between the two.
Finally, turning to the neither class, we see that tweets
with the highest predicted probability of belonging to this
class all appear to be innocuous and were included in the
sample because they contained terms included in the Hate-
base lexicon such as charlie andbird that are generally not
used in a hateful manner. Tweets with overall positive sen-
timent and higher readability scores are more likely to be-
long to this class. The tweets in this category that have
been misclassiﬁed as hate or offensive tend to mention race,
sexuality, and other social categories that are targeted by
hate speakers. Most appear to be misclassiﬁcations appear
to be caused by on the presence of potentially offensive
language, for example He’s a damn good actor. As a gay
man it’s awesome to see an openly queer actor given the
lead role for a major ﬁlm contains the potentially the offen-
sive terms gayandqueer but uses them in a positive sense.
This problem has been encountered in previous research
(Warner and Hirschberg 2012) and illustrates the impor-
tance of taking context into account. We also found a small
number of cases where the coders appear to have missed
hate speech that was correctly identiﬁed by our model, e.g.
@mayormcgunn @SenFeinstein White people need those
weapons to defend themselves from the subhuman trash your
sort unleashes on us . This ﬁnding is consistent with pre-
vious work that has found amateur coders to often be un-
reliable at identifying abusive content (Nobata et al. 2016;
Waseem 2016).
Conclusions
If we conﬂate hate speech and offensive language then we
erroneously consider many people to be hate speakers (er-
rors in the lower triangle of Figure 1) and fail differenti-
ate between commonplace offensive language and serious
hate speech (errors in the upper triangle of Figure 1). Given
the legal and moral implications of hate speech it is im-
portant that we are able to accurately distinguish between
the two. Lexical methods are effective ways to identify po-
tentially offensive terms but are inaccurate at identifying
hate speech; only a small percentage of tweets ﬂagged by
the Hatebase lexicon were considered hate speech by hu-
man coders.4While automated classiﬁcation methods can
achieve relatively high accuracy at differentiating between
these different classes, close analysis of the results shows
that the presence or absence of particular offensive or hate-
ful terms can both help and hinder accurate classiﬁcation.
Consistent with previous work, we ﬁnd that certain
terms are particularly useful for distinguishing between hate
speech and offensive language. While f*g,b*tch , and n*gga
are used in both hate speech and offensive language, the
terms f*ggot andn*gger are generally associated with hate
speech. Many of the tweets considered most hateful contain
multiple racial and homophobic slurs. While this allows us
to easily identify some of the more egregious instances of
hate speech it means that we are more likely to misclassify
hate speech if it doesn’t contain any curse words or offensive
terms. To more accurately classify such cases we should ﬁnd
sources of training data that are hateful without necessarily
using particular keywords or offensive language.
Our results also illustrate how hate speech can be used in
4If a lexicon must be used we propose that a smaller lexicon
with higher precision is preferable to a larger lexicon with higher
recall. We have made a more restricted version of the Hatebase lex-
icon available here: https://github.com/t-davidson/
hate-speech-and-offensive-language .different ways: it can be directly send to a person or group
of people targeted, it can be espoused to nobody in particu-
lar, and it can be used in conversation between people. Fu-
ture work should distinguish between these different uses
and look more closely at the social contexts and conversa-
tions in which hate speech occurs. We must also study more
closely the people who use hate speech, focusing both on
their individual characteristics and motivations and on the
social structures they are embedded in.
Hate speech is a difﬁcult phenomenon to deﬁne and is not
monolithic. Our classiﬁcations of hate speech tend to reﬂect
our own subjective biases. People identify racist and homo-
phobic slurs as hateful but tend to see sexist language as
merely offensive. While our results show that people per-
form well at identifying some of the more egregious in-
stances of hate speech, particularly anti-black racism and ho-
mophobia, it is important that we are cognizant of the social
biases that enter into our algorithms and future work should
aim to identify and correct these biases.
References
Bird, S.; Loper, E.; and Klein, E. 2009. Natural Language Pro-
cessing with Python . O’Reilly Media Inc.
Burnap, P., and Williams, M. L. 2015. Cyber hate speech on twit-
ter: An application of machine classiﬁcation and statistical model-
ing for policy and decision making. Policy & Internet 7(2):223–
242.
Djuric, N.; Zhou, J.; Morris, R.; Grbovic, M.; Radosavljevic, V .;
and Bhamidipati, N. 2015. Hate speech detection with comment
embeddings. In WWW , 29–30.
Gitari, N. D.; Zuping, Z.; Damien, H.; and Long, J. 2015. A
lexicon-based approach for hate speech detection. International
Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering 10:215–230.
Hutto, C. J., and Gilbert, E. 2014. V ADER: A parsimonious rule-
based model for sentiment analysis of social media text. In ICWSM .
Jacobs, J. B., and Potter, K. 2000. Hate crimes: Criminal Law and
Identity Politics . Oxford University Press.
Kwok, I., and Wang, Y . 2013. Locate the hate: Detecting tweets
against blacks. In AAAI .
Nobata, C.; Tetreault, J.; Thomas, A.; Mehdad, Y .; and Chang, Y .
2016. Abusive language detection in online user content. In WWW ,
145–153.
Pedregosa, F., et al. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12:2825–2830.
Silva, L. A.; Mondal, M.; Correa, D.; Benevenuto, F.; and Weber,
I. 2016. Analyzing the targets of hate in online social media. In
ICWSM , 687–690.
Walker, S. 1994. Hate Speech: The History of an American Con-
troversy . U of Nebraska Press.
Wang, W.; Chen, L.; Thirunarayan, K.; and Sheth, A. P. 2014.
Cursing in english on twitter. In CSCW , 415–425.
Warner, W., and Hirschberg, J. 2012. Detecting hate speech on the
world wide web. In LSM , 19–26.
Waseem, Z., and Hovy, D. 2016. Hateful symbols or hateful peo-
ple? predictive features for hate speech detection on twitter. In
SRW@HLT-NAACL , 88–93.
Waseem, Z. 2016. Are you a racist or am i seeing things? annotator
inﬂuence on hate speech detection on twitter. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on NLP and CSS , 138–142.