Title: MS MARCO: A Human Generated MAchine Reading COmprehension Dataset

MS MARCO: A Human Generated MAchine
Reading COmprehension Dataset
Payal Bajaj, Daniel Campos, Nick Craswell, Li Deng, Jianfeng Gao,
Xiaodong Liu, Rangan Majumder, Andrew McNamara, Bhaskar Mitra, Tri Nguyen,
Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Alina Stoica, Saurabh Tiwary, and Tong Wang
Microsoft AI & Research
Abstract
We introduce a large scale MAchine Reading COmprehension dataset, which we
name MS MARCO. The dataset comprises of 1,010,916 anonymized questions—
sampled from Bing’s search query logs—each with a human generated answer and
182,669 completely human rewritten generated answers. In addition, the dataset
contains 8,841,823 passages—extracted from 3,563,535 web documents retrieved
by Bing—that provide the information necessary for curating the natural language
answers. A question in the MS MARCO dataset may have multiple answers or no
answers at all. Using this dataset, we propose three different tasks with varying
levels of difﬁculty: (i) predict if a question is answerable given a set of context
passages, and extract and synthesize the answer as a human would (ii) generate
a well-formed answer (if possible) based on the context passages that can be
understood with the question and passage context, and ﬁnally (iii) rank a set of
retrieved passages given a question. The size of the dataset and the fact that the
questions are derived from real user search queries distinguishes MS MARCO from
other well-known publicly available datasets for machine reading comprehension
and question-answering. We believe that the scale and the real-world nature of this
dataset makes it attractive for benchmarking machine reading comprehension and
question-answering models.
1 Introduction
Building intelligent agents with machine reading comprehension (MRC) or open-domain question
answering (QA) capabilities using real world data is an important goal of artiﬁcial intelligence.
Progress in developing these capabilities can be of signiﬁcant consumer value if employed in
automated assistants— e.g., Cortana [Cortana], Siri [Siri], Alexa [Amazon Alexa], or Google Assistant
[Google Assistant]—on mobile devices and smart speakers, such as Amazon Echo [Amazon Echo].
Many of these devices rely heavily on recent advances in speech recognition technology powered by
neural models with deep architectures [Hinton et al., 2012, Dahl et al., 2012]. The rising popularity
of spoken interfaces makes it more attractive for users to use natural language dialog for question-
answering and information retrieval from the web as opposed to viewing traditional search result
pages on a web browser [Gao et al., 2018]. Chatbots and other messenger based intelligent agents are
also becoming popular in automating business processes— e.g., answering customer service requests.
All of these scenarios can beneﬁt from fundamental improvements in MRC models. However,
MRC in the wild is extremely challenging. Successful MRC systems should be able to learn good
representations from raw text, infer and reason over learned representations, and ﬁnally generate a
summarized response that is correct in both form and content.
The public availability of large datasets has been instrumental in many AI research breakthroughs
[Wissner-Gross, 2016]. For example, ImageNet’s [Deng et al., 2009] release of 1.5 million labeled
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.arXiv:1611.09268v3  [cs.CL]  31 Oct 2018
examples with 1000 object categories led to the development of object classiﬁcation models that
perform better than humans on the ImageNet task [He et al., 2015]. Similarly, the large speech
database collected over 20 years by DARPA enabled new breakthroughs in speech recognition
performance from deep learning models Deng and Huang [2004]. Several MRC and QA datasets
have also recently emerged. However, many of these existing datasets are not sufﬁciently large
to train deep neural models with large number of parameters. Large scale existing MRC datasets,
when available, are often synthetic. Furthermore, a common characteristic, shared by many of these
datasets, is that the questions are usually generated by crowd workers based on provided text spans
or documents. In MS MARCO, in contrast, the questions correspond to actual search queries that
users submitted to Bing, and therefore may be more representative of a “natural” distribution of
information need that users may want to satisfy using, say, an intelligent assistant.
Real-world text is messy: they may include typos or abbreviations—and transcription errors in case of
spoken interfaces. The text from different documents may also often contain conﬂicting information.
Most existing datasets, in contrast, often contain high-quality stories or text spans from sources such
as Wikipedia. Real-world MRC systems should be benchmarked on realistic datasets where they
need to be robust to noisy and problematic inputs.
Finally, another potential limitation of existing MRC tasks is that they often require the model to
operate on a single entity or a text span. Under many real-world application settings, the information
necessary to answer a question may be spread across different parts of the same document, or even
across multiple documents. It is, therefore, important to test an MRC model on its ability to extract
information and support for the ﬁnal answer from multiple passages and documents.
In this paper, we introduce Microsoft MAchine Reading Comprehension (MS MARCO)—a large
scale real-world reading comprehension dataset—with the goal of addressing many of the above
mentioned shortcomings of existing MRC and QA datasets. The dataset comprises of anonymized
search queries issued through Bing or Cortana. We annotate each question with segment information
as we describe in Section 3. Corresponding to each question, we provide a set of extracted passages
from documents retrieved by Bing in response to the question. The passages and the documents may
or may not actually contain the necessary information to answer the question. For each question, we
ask crowd-sourced editors to generate answers based on the information contained in the retrieved
passages. In addition to generating the answer, the editors are also instructed to mark the passages
containing the supporting information—although we do not enforce these annotations to be exhaustive.
The editors are allowed to mark a question as unanswerable based on the passages provided. We
include these unanswerable questions in our dataset because we believe that the ability to recognize
insufﬁcient (or conﬂicting) information that makes a question unanswerable is important to develop
for an MRC model. The editors are strongly encouraged to form answers in complete sentences. In
total, the MS MARCO dataset contains 1,010,916 questions, 8,841,823 companion passages extracted
from 3,563,535 web documents, and 182,669 editorially generated answers. Using this dataset, we
propose three different tasks with varying levels of difﬁculty:
(i)Predict if a question is answerable given a set of context passages, and extract relevant
information and synthesize the answer.
(ii)Generate a well-formed answer (if possible) based on the context passages that can be
understood with the question and passage context.
(iii) Rank a set of retrieved passages given a question.
We describe the dataset and the proposed tasks in more details in the rest of this paper and present
some preliminary benchmarking results on these tasks.
2 Related work
Machine reading comprehension and open domain question-answering are challenging tasks [Weston
et al., 2015]. To encourage more rapid progress, the community has made several different datasets
and tasks publicly available for benchmarking. We summarize some of them in this section.
The Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) Rajpurkar et al. [2016] consists of 107,785
question-answer pairs from 536 articles, where each answer is a text span. The key distinction
between SQUAD and MS MARCO are:
2
Table 1: Comparison of MS MARCO and some of the other MRC datasets.
Dataset Segment Question Source Answer # Questions # Documents
NewsQA No Crowd-sourced Span of words 100k 10k
DuReader No Crowd-sourced Human generated 200k 1M
NarrativeQA No Crowd-sourced Human generated 46,765 1,572 stories
SearchQA No Generated Span of words 140k 6.9M passages
RACE No Crowd-sourced Multiple choice 97k 28k
ARC No Generated Multiple choice 7,787 14M sentences
SQuAD No Crowd-sourced Span of words 100K 536
MS MARCO Yes User logs Human generated 1M 8.8M passages, 3.2m docs.
1.The MS MARCO dataset is more than ten times larger than SQuAD—which is an important
consideration if we want to benchmark large deep learning models [Frank, 2017].
2.The questions in SQuAD are editorially generated based on selected answer spans, while in
MS MARCO they are sampled from Bing’s query logs.
3.The answers in SQuAD consists of spans of texts from the provided passages while the
answers in MS MARCO are editorially generated.
4.Originally SQuAD contained only answerable questions, although this changed in the more
recent edition of the task [Rajpurkar et al., 2018].
NewsQA [Trischler et al., 2017] is a MRC dataset with over 100,000 question and span-answer pairs
based off roughly 10,000 CNN news articles. The goal of the NewsQA task is to test MRC models
on reasoning skills—beyond word matching and paraphrasing. Crowd-sourced editors created
the questions from the title of the articles and the summary points (provided by CNN) without
access to the article itself. A 4-stage collection methodology was employed to generate a more
challenging MRC task. More than 44% of the NewsQA questions require inference and synthesis,
compared to SQuAD’s 20%.
DuReader [He et al., 2017] is a Chinese MRC dataset built with real application data from Baidu
search and Baidu Zhidao—a community question answering website. It contains 200,000 questions
and 420,000 answers from 1,000,000 documents. In addition, DuReader provides additional
annotations of the answers—labelling them as either fact based or opinionative. Within each
category, they are further divided into entity, yes/no, and descriptive answers.
NarrativeQA [Kociský et al., 2017] dataset contains questions created by editors based on sum-
maries of movie scripts and books. The dataset contains about 45,000 question-answer pairs over
1,567 stories, evenly split between books and movie scripts. Compared to the news corpus used
in NewsQA, the collection of movie scripts and books are more complex and diverse—allowing
the editors to create questions that may require more complex reasoning. The movie scripts and
books are also longer documents than the news or wikipedia article, as is the case with NewsQA
and SQuAD, respectively.
SearchQA [Dunn et al., 2017] takes questions from the American TV quiz show, Jeopardy1and
submits them as queries to Google to extract snippets from top 40 retrieved documents that may
contain the answers to the questions. Document snippets not containing answers are ﬁltered out,
leaving more than 140K questions-answer pairs and 6.9M snippets. The answers are short exact
spans of text averaging between 1-2 tokens. MS MARCO, in contrast, focuses more on longer
natural language answer generation, and the questions correspond to Bing search queries instead of
trivia questions.
RACE [Lai et al., 2017] contains roughly 100,000 multiple choice questions and 27,000 passages
from standardized tests for Chinese students learning English as a foreign language. The dataset
is split up into: RACE-M, which has approximately 30,000 questions targeted at middle school
students aged 12-15, and RACE-H, which has approximately 70,000 questions targeted at high
school students aged 15 to 18. Lai et al. [2017] claim that current state of the art neural models at
the time of their publishing were performing at 44% accuracy while the ceiling human performance
was 95%.
AI2 Reasoning Challenge (ARC) [Clark et al., 2018] by Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
consists of 7,787 grade-school multiple choice science questions—typically with 4 possible
answers. The answers generally require external knowledge or complex reasoning. In addition,
1https://www.jeopardy.com/
3
Figure 1: Simpliﬁed passage selection and answer summarization UI for human editors.
ARC provides a corpus of 14M science-related sentences with knowledge relevant to the challenge.
However, the training of the models does not have to include, nor be limited to, this corpus.
ReCoRD [Zhang et al., 2018] contains 12,000 Cloze-style question-passage pairs extracted from
CNN/Daily Mail news articles. For each pair in this dataset, the question and the passage are
selected from the same news article such that they have minimal text overlap—making them
unlikely to be paraphrases of each other—but refer to at least one common named entity. The focus
of this dataset is on evaluating MRC models on their common-sense reasoning capabilities.
3 The MS Marco dataset
To generate the 1,010,916 questions with 1,026,758 unique answers we begin by sampling queries
from Bing’s search logs. We ﬁlter out any non-question queries from this set. We retrieve relevant
documents for each question using Bing from its large-scale web index. Then we automatically
extract relevant passages from these documents. Finally, human editors annotate passages that
contain useful and necessary information for answering the questions—and compose a well-formed
natural language answers summarizing the said information. Figure 1 shows the user interface for a
web-based tool that the editors use for completing these annotation and answer composition tasks.
During the editorial annotation and answer generation process, we continuously audit the data being
generated to ensure accuracy and quality of answers—and verify that the guidelines are appropriately
followed.
As previously mentioned, the questions in MS MARCO correspond to user submitted queries from
Bing’s query logs. The question formulations, therefore, are often complex, ambiguous, and may
even contain typographical and other errors. An example of such a question issued to Bing is: “in
what type of circulation does the oxygenated blood ﬂow between the heart and the cells of the body?”.
We believe that these questions, while sometimes not well-formatted, are more representative of
human information seeking behaviour. Another example of a question from our dataset includes:
“will I qualify for osap if i’m new in Canada”. As shown in ﬁgure 1, one of the relevant passages
include: “You must be a 1. Canadian citizen, 2. Permanent Resident or 3. Protected person”. When
auditing our editorial process, we observe that even the human editors ﬁnd the task of answering
these questions to be sometimes difﬁcult—especially when the question is in a domain the editor
is unfamiliar with. We, therefore, believe that the MS MARCO presents a challenging dataset for
benchmarking MRC models.
The MS MARCO dataset that we are publishing consists of six major components:
1.Questions : These are a set of anonymized question queries from Bing’s search logs, where
the user is looking for a speciﬁc answer. Queries with navigational and other intents are
4
Table 2: Distribution of questions based on answer-type classiﬁer
Question segment Percentage of question
Question contains
YesNo 7.46%
What 34.96%
How 16.8%
Where 3.46%
When 2.71%
Why 1.67%
Who 3.33%
Which 1.79%
Other 27.83%
Question classiﬁcation
Description 53.12%
Numeric 26.12%
Entity 8.81%
Location 6.17%
Person 5.78%
excluded from our dataset. This ﬁltering of question queries is performed automatically by
a machine learning based classiﬁer trained previously on human annotated data. Selected
questions are further annotated by editors based on whether they are answerable using the
passages provided.
2.Passages : For each question, on average we include a set of 10passages which may contain
the answer to the question. These passages are extracted from relevant web documents.
They are selected by a state-of-the-art passage retrieval system at Bing. The editors are
instructed to annotate the passages they use to compose the ﬁnal answer as is_selected. For
questions, where no answer was present in any of the passages, they should all be annotated
by setting is_selected to 0.
3.Answers : For each question, the dataset contains zero, or more answers composed manually
by the human editors. The editors are instructed to read and understand the questions,
inspect the retrieved passages, and then synthesize a natural language answer with the
correct information extracted strictly from the passages provided.
4.Well-formed Answers : For some question-answer pairs, the data also contains one or more
answers that are generated by a post-hoc review-and-rewrite process. This process involves
a separate editor reviewing the provided answer and rewriting it if: (i) it does not have
proper grammar, (ii) there is a high overlap in the answer and one of the provided passages
(indicating that the original editor may have copied the passage directly), or (iii) the answer
can not be understood without the question and the passage context. e.g., given the question
“tablespoon in cup” and the answer “16”, the well-formed answer should be “There are 16
tablespoons in a cup.”.
5.Document : For each of the documents from which the passages were originally extracted
from, we include: (i) the URL, (ii) the body text, and (iii) the title. We extracted these
documents from Bing’s index as a separate post-processing step. Roughly 300,000 docu-
ments could not be retrieved because they were no longer in the index and for the remaining
it is possible—even likely—that the content may have changed since the passages were
originally extracted.
6.Question type : Each question is further automatically annotated using a machine learned
classiﬁer with one of the following segment labels: (i) NUMERIC, (ii) ENTITY , (iii) LOCA-
TION, (iv) PERSON, or (v) DESCRIPTION (phrase). Table 2 lists the relative size of the
different question segments and compares it with the proportion of questions that explicitly
contain words like “what” and “"where”. Note that because the questions in our dataset are
based on web search queries, we are may observe a question like “what is the age of barack
obama” be expressed simply as “barack obama age” in our dataset.
5
Table 3: The MS MARCO dataset format.
Field Description
Query A question query issued to Bing.
Passages Top 10 passages from Web documents as retrieved by Bing. The passages
are presented in ranked order to human editors. The passage that the editor
uses to compose the answer is annotated as is_selected: 1.
Document URLs URLs of the top ranked documents for the question from Bing. The passages
are extracted from these documents.
Answer(s) Answers composed by human editors for the question, automatically ex-
tracted passages and their corresponding documents.
Well Formed Answer(s) Well-formed answer rewritten by human editors, and the original answer.
Segment QA classiﬁcation. E.g., tallest mountain in south america belongs to the
ENTITY segment because the answer is an entity (Aconcagua).
Table 3 describes the ﬁnal dataset format for MS MARCO. Inspired by [Gebru et al., 2018] we also
release our dataset’s datasheet on our website. Finally, we summarize the key distinguishing features
of the MS MARCO dataset as follows:
1. The questions are anonymized user queries issued to the Bing.
2. All questions are annotated with segment information.
3.The context passages—from which the answers are derived—are extracted from real web
documents.
4. The answers are composed by human editors.
5. A subset of the questions have multiple answers.
6. A subset of the questions have no answers.
3.1 The passage ranking dataset
To facilitate the benchmarking of ML based retrieval models that beneﬁt from supervised training
on large datasets, we are releasing a passage collection—constructed by taking the union of all the
passages in the MS MARCO dataset—and a set of relevant question and passage identiﬁer pairs.
To identify the relevant passages, we use the is_selected annotation provided by the editors. As
the editors were not required to annotate every passage that were retrieved for the question, this
annotation should be considered as incomplete— i.e., there are likely passages in the collection that
contain the answer to a question but have not been annotated as is_selected: 1. We use this dataset to
propose a re-ranking challenge as described in Section 4. Additionally, we are organizing a “Deep
Learning” track at the 2019 edition of TREC2where we use these passage and question collections to
setup an ad-hoc retrieval task.
4 The challenges
Using the MS MARCO dataset, we propose three machine learning tasks of diverse difﬁculty levels:
The novice task requires the system to ﬁrst predict whether a question can be answered based only
on the information contained in the provided passages. If the question cannot be answered,
then the system should return “No Answer Present” as response. If the question can be
answered, then the system should generate the correct answer.
The intermediate task is similar to the novice task, except that the generated answer should be
well-formed—such that, if the answer is read-aloud then it should make sense even without
the context of the question and retrieved passages.
The passage re-ranking task is an information retrieval (IR) challenge. Given a question and a set
of 1000 retrieved passages using BM25 [Robertson et al., 2009], the system must produce a
2https://trec.nist.gov/
6
ranking of the said passages based on how likely they are to contain information relevant to
answer the question. This task is targeted to provide a large scale dataset for benchmarking
emerging neural IR methods [Mitra and Craswell, 2018].
5 The benchmarking results
We continue to develop and reﬁne the MS MARCO dataset iteratively. Presented at NIPS 2016 the
V1.0 dataset was released and recieved with enthusiasm In January 2017, we publicly released the
1.1 version of the dataset. In Section 5.1, we present our initial benchmarking results based on this
dataset. Subsequently, we release 2.0 the v2.1 version of the MS MARCO dataset in March 2018 and
April 2018 respectively. Section 5.2 covers the experimental results on the update dataset. Finally, in
October 2018, we released additional data ﬁles for the passage ranking task.
5.1 Experimental results on v1.1 dataset
We group the questions in MS MARCO by the segment annotation, as described in Section 3. The
complexity of the answers varies signiﬁcantly between categories. For example, the answers to
Yes/No questions are binary. The answers to entity questions can be a single entity name or phrase—
e.g., the answer "Rome" for the question what is the capital of Italy". However, for descriptive
questions, a longer textual answer is often necessary— e.g., "What is the agenda for Hollande’s state
visit to Washington?". The evaluation strategy that is appropriate for Yes/No answer questions may
not be appropriate for benchmarking on questions that require longer answer generation. Therefore,
in our experiments we employ different evaluation metrics for different categories, building on
metrics proposed initially by [Mitra et al., 2016]. We use accuracy and precision-recall measures
for numeric answers and apply metrics like ROUGE-L [Lin, 2004] and phrasing-aware evaluation
framework [Mitra et al., 2016] for long textual answers. The phrasing-aware evaluation framework
aims to deal with the diversity of natural language in evaluating long textual answers. The evaluation
requires several reference answers per question that are each curated by a different human editor, thus
providing a natural way to estimate how diversely a group of individuals may phrase the answer to
the same question. A family of pairwise similarity-based metrics can used to incorporate consensus
between different reference answers for evaluation. These metrics are simple modiﬁcations to metrics
like BLEU [Papineni et al., 2002] and METEOR [Banerjee and Lavie, 2005] and are shown to achieve
better correlation with human judgments. Accordingly, as part of our experiments, a subset of MS
MARCO where each question has multiple answers is used to evaluate model performance with both
BLEU and pa-BLEU as metrics.
5.1.1 Generative Model Experiments
The following experiments were run on the V1.1 dataset
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are capable of predicting future elements from sequence prior.
It is often used as a generative language model for various NLP tasks, such as machine translation
[Bahdanau et al., 2014] and question-answering [Hermann et al., 2015a]. In this QA experiment
setup, we target training and evaluation of such generative models which predict the human-generated
answers given questions and/or contextual passages as model input.
Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) Model. We train a vanilla Seq2Seq [Sutskever et al., 2014]
model with the question-answer pair as source-target sequences.
Memory Networks Model. We adapt end-to-end memory networks [Sukhbaatar et al., 2015]—that
has previously demonstrated good performance on other QA tasks—by using summed
memory representation as the initial state of the RNN decoder.
Discriminative Model. For comparison, we also train a discriminative model to rank provided
passages as a baseline. This is a variant of [Huang et al., 2013] where we use LSTM
[Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997] in place of multi-layer perceptron (MLP).
Table 4 shows the preformance of these models using ROUGE-L metric. Additionally, we evaluate
memory networks model on an MS MARCO subset where questions have multiple answers. Table 5
shows the performance of the model as measured by BLEU and its pairwise variant pa-BLEU [Mitra
et al., 2016].
7
Table 4: ROUGE-L of Different QA Models Tested against a Subset of MS MARCO
Description ROUGE-L
Best Passage Best ROUGE-L of any passage 0.351
Passage Ranking A DSSM-alike passage ranking model 0.177
Sequence to Sequence Vanilla seq2seq model predicting answers from questions 0.089
Memory Network Seq2seq model with MemNN for passages 0.119
Table 5: BLEU and pa-BLEU on a Multi-Answer Subset of MS MARCO
BLEU pa-BLEU
Best Passage 0.359 0.453
Memory Network 0.340 0.341
5.1.2 Cloze-Style Model Experiments
In Cloze-style tests, a model is required to predict missing words in a text sequence by considering
contextual information in textual format. CNN and Daily Mail dataset [Hermann et al., 2015b] is an
example of such a cloze-style QA dataset. In this section, we present the performance of two MRC
models using both CNN test dataset and a MS MARCO subset. The subset is ﬁltered to numeric
answer type category, to which cloze-style test is applicable.
Attention Sum Reader (AS Reader) : AS Reader [Kadlec et al., 2016] is a simple model that
uses attention to directly pick the answer from the context.
ReasoNet : ReasoNet [Shen et al., 2016] also relies on attention, but is also a dynamic
multi-turn model that attempts to exploit and reason over the relation among questions,
contexts, and answers.
We show model accuracy numbers on both datasets in table 6, and precision-recall curves on MS
MARCO subset in ﬁgure 2.
5.2 Experimental results on v2.1 dataset
The human baseline on our v1.1 benchmark was surpassed by competing machine learned models
in approximately 15 months. For the v2.1 dataset, we revisit our approach to generating the human
baseline. We select ﬁve top performing editors—based on their performance on a set of auditing
questions—to create a human baseline task group. We randomly sample 1,427 questions from our
evaluation set and ask each of these editors to produce a new assessment. Then, we compare all
our editorial answers to the ground truth and select the answer with the best ROUGE-L score as the
candidate answer. Table 7 shows the results. We evaluate the answer set on both the novice and the
intermediate task and we include questions that have no answer.
To provide a competitive experimental baseline for our dataset, we trained the model introduced in
[Clark and Gardner, 2017]. This model uses recent ideas in reading comprehension research, like
self-attention [Cheng et al., 2016] and bi-directional attention [Seo et al., 2016]. Our goal is to train
this model such that, given a question and a passage that contains an answer to the question, the
model identiﬁes the answer (or span) in the passage. This is similar to the task in SQuAD [Rajpurkar
et al., 2016]. First, we select the question-passage pairs where the passage contains an answer to the
question and the answer is a contiguous set of words from the passage. Then, we train the model to
predict a span for each question-passage pair and output a conﬁdence score. To evaluate the model,
Table 6: Accuracy of MRC Models on Numeric Segment of MS MARCO
Accuracy
MS MARCO CNN (test)
AS Reader 55.0 69.5
ReasoNet 58.9 74.7
8
0 0:2 0:4 0:6 0:8 10:60:70:80:91
RecallPrecisionAS Reader
ReasoNet
Figure 2: Precision-Recall of Machine Reading Comprehension Models on MS MARCO Subset of
Numeric Category
Table 7: Performance of MRC Span Model and Human Baseline on MS Marco Tasks
Task ROUGE-L BLEU-1 BLEU-2 BLEU-3 BLEU-4
BiDaF on Original 0.268 0.129 0.094 0.079 0.070
Human Ensemble on Novice 0.73703 0.51586 0.46771 0.43391 0.40540674
Human Ensemble on Intermediate 0.63044 0.52747 0.45439 0.41235 0.38173
BiDaF on V2 Novice 0.150 0.126 0.094 0.079 0.072
BiDaF on V2 Intermediate 0.170 0.093 0.070 0.059 0.053
for each question we chose our model generated answer that has the highest conﬁdence score among
all passages available for that question. To compare model performance across datasets we run this
exact setup (training and evaluation) on the original dataset and the new V2 Tasks. Table 7 shows
the results. The results indicate that the new v2.1 dataset is more difﬁcult than the previous v1.1
version. On the novice task BiDaF cannot determine when the question is not answerable and thus
performs substantially worse compared to on the v1.1 dataset. On the intermediate task, BiDaF
performance once again drops because the model only uses vocabulary present in the passage whereas
the well-formed answers may include words from the general vocabulary.
6 Future Work and Conclusions
The process of developing the MS MARCO dataset and making it publicly available has been a
tremendous learning experience. Between the ﬁrst version of the dataset and the most recent edition,
we have signiﬁcantly modiﬁed how we collect and annotate the data, the deﬁnition of our tasks, and
even broadened our scope to cater to the neural IR community. The future of this dataset will depend
largely on how the broader academic community makes use of this dataset. For example, we believe
that the size and the underlying use of Bing’s search queries and web documents in the construction
of the dataset makes it particularly attractive for benchmarking new machine learning models for
MRC and neural IR. But in addition to improving these ML models, the dataset may also prove to
be useful for exploring new metrics— e.g., ROUGE-2 [Ganesan, 2018] and ROUGE-AR[Maples,
2017]—and robust evaluation strategies. Similarly, combining MS MARCO with other existing MRC
datasets may also be interesting in the context of multi-task and cross domain learning. We want
to engage with the community to get their feedback and guidance on how we can make it easier to
enable such new explorations using the MS MARCO data. If there is enough interest, we may also
consider generating similar datasets in other languages in the future—or augment the existing dataset
with other information from the web.
9
References
Amazon Alexa. Amazon alexa. http://alexa.amazon.com/ , 2018.
Amazon Echo. Amazon echo. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Echo , 2018.
D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.0473 , 2014.
S. Banerjee and A. Lavie. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation with human
judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine
translation and/or summarization , volume 29, pages 65–72, 2005.
J. Cheng, L. Dong, and M. Lapata. Long short-term memory-networks for machine reading. CoRR ,
abs/1601.06733, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.06733 .
C. Clark and M. Gardner. Simple and effective multi-paragraph reading comprehension. CoRR , abs/1710.10723,
2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10723 .
P. Clark, I. Cowhey, O. Etzioni, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, C. Schoenick, and O. Tafjord. Think you have solved
question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. 2018.
Cortana. Cortana personal assistant. http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/mobile/experiences/
cortana/ , 2018.
G. Dahl, D. Yu, L. Deng, and A. Acero. Context-dependent pre-trained deep neural networks for large-vocabulary
speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 20(1):30–42, 2012.
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fe. Imagenet: Alarge-scalehierarchicalimagedatabas.
CVPR , 2009. URL http://www.image-net.org/papers/imagenet_cvpr09.pdf .
L. Deng and X. Huang. Challenges in adopting speech recognition. Communications of the ACM , 47(1):69–75,
2004.
M. Dunn, L. Sagun, M. Higgins, V . U. Güney, V . Cirik, and K. Cho. Searchqa: A new q&a dataset augmented
with context from a search engine. CoRR , abs/1704.05179, 2017.
B. H. Frank. Google brain chief: Deep learning takes at least 100,000 examples. https://venturebeat.com/
2017/10/23/google-brain-chief-says-100000-examples-is-enough-data-for-deep-learning/ ,
2017.
K. Ganesan. Rouge 2.0: Updated and improved measures for evaluation of summarization tasks. 2018.
J. Gao, M. Galley, and L. Li. Neural approaches to conversational ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.08267 , 2018.
T. Gebru, J. Morgenstern, B. Vecchione, J. W. Vaughan, H. Wallach, H. D. III, and K. Crawford. Datasheets for
datasets. 2018.
Google Assistant. Google assistant. https://assistant.google.com/ , 2018.
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. 2015. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385 .
W. He, K. Liu, Y . Lyu, S. Zhao, X. Xiao, Y . Liu, Y . Wang, H. Wu, Q. She, X. Liu, T. Wu, and H. Wang. Dureader:
a chinese machine reading comprehension dataset from real-world applications. CoRR , abs/1711.05073,
2017.
K. M. Hermann, T. Kociský, E. Grefenstette, L. Espeholt, W. Kay, M. Suleyman, and P. Blunsom. Teaching
machines to read and comprehend. 2015a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.03340 .
K. M. Hermann, T. Kocisky, E. Grefenstette, L. Espeholt, W. Kay, M. Suleyman, and P. Blunsom. Teaching
machines to read and comprehend. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1693–1701,
2015b.
G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. Dalh, and A. Mohamed. Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech
recognition: The shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 29(6):82–97,
2012.
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
10
P.-S. Huang, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, A. Acero, and L. Heck. Learning deep structured semantic models for web
search using clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Conference on
information & knowledge management , pages 2333–2338. ACM, 2013.
R. Kadlec, M. Schmid, O. Bajgar, and J. Kleindienst. Text understanding with the attention sum reader network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01547 , 2016.
T. Kociský, J. Schwarz, P. Blunsom, C. Dyer, K. M. Hermann, G. Melis, and E. Grefenstette. The narrativeqa
reading comprehension challenge. CoRR , abs/1712.07040, 2017.
G. Lai, Q. Xie, H. Liu, Y . Yang, and E. H. Hovy. Race: Large-scale reading comprehension dataset from
examinations. In EMNLP , 2017.
C.-Y . Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out:
Proceedings of the ACL-04 workshop , volume 8. Barcelona, Spain, 2004.
S. Maples. The rouge-ar: A proposed extension to the rouge evaluation metric for abstractive text summarization.
2017.
B. Mitra and N. Craswell. An introduction to neural information retrieval. Foundations and Trends Rin
Information Retrieval (to appear) , 2018.
B. Mitra, G. Simon, J. Gao, N. Craswell, and L. J. Deng. A proposal for evaluating answer distillation from web
data. 2016.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation.
InProceedings of the 40th annual meeting on association for computational linguistics , pages 311–318.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002.
P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of
text. 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05250 .
P. Rajpurkar, R. Jia, and P. Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions for squad. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.03822 , 2018.
S. Robertson, H. Zaragoza, et al. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond. Foundations and
Trends Rin Information Retrieval , 3(4):333–389, 2009.
M. J. Seo, A. Kembhavi, A. Farhadi, and H. Hajishirzi. Bidirectional attention ﬂow for machine comprehension.
CoRR , abs/1611.01603, 2016.
Y . Shen, P.-S. Huang, J. Gao, and W. Chen. Reasonet: Learning to stop reading in machine comprehension.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05284 , 2016.
Siri. Siri personal assistant. http://www.apple.com/ios/siri/ , 2018.
S. Sukhbaatar, J. Weston, R. Fergus, et al. End-to-end memory networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pages 2440–2448, 2015.
I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V . Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. CoRR ,
abs/1409.3215, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.3215 .
A. Trischler, T. Wang, X. Yuan, J. Harris, A. Sordoni, P. Bachman, and K. Suleman. Newsqa: A machine
comprehension dataset. In Rep4NLP@ACL , 2017.
J. Weston, A. Bordes, S. Chopra, A. M. Rush, B. van Merrienboer, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov. Towards
ai-complete question answering: A set of prerequisite toy tasks. 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1502.05698 .
A. Wissner-Gross. Datasets over algorithms. Edge. com. Retrieved , 8, 2016.
S. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Liu, J. Gao, K. Duh, and B. Van Durme y. Record: Bridging the gap between human and
machine commonsense reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12885 , 2018.
11