Title: Gender Bias in Machine Translation

Gender Bias in Machine Translation
Beatrice Savoldi1,2, Marco Gaido1,2, Luisa Bentivogli2, Matteo Negri2, Marco Turchi2
1University of Trento
2Fondazione Bruno Kessler
fbsavoldi,mgaido,bentivo,negri,turchi g@fbk.eu
Abstract
Machine translation (MT) technology has
facilitated our daily tasks by providing ac-
cessible shortcuts for gathering, processing
and communicating information. However,
it can suffer from biases that harm users and
society at large. As a relatively new ﬁeld of
inquiry, studies of gender bias in MT still
lack cohesion. This advocates for a uniﬁed
framework to ease future research. To this
end, we: i)critically review current concep-
tualizations of bias in light of theoretical in-
sights from related disciplines, ii)summarize
previous analyses aimed at assessing gender
bias in MT, iii)discuss the mitigating strate-
gies proposed so far, and iv)point toward
potential directions for future work.
1 Introduction
Interest in understanding, assessing, and mitigating
gender bias is steadily growing within the natu-
ral language processing (NLP) community, with
recent studies showing how gender disparities af-
fect language technologies. Sometimes, for exam-
ple, coreference resolution systems fail to recog-
nize women doctors (Zhao et al., 2017; Rudinger
et al., 2018), image captioning models do not detect
women sitting next to a computer (Hendricks et al.,
2018), and automatic speech recognition works
better with male voices (Tatman, 2017). Despite a
prior disregard for such phenomena within research
agendas (Cislak et al., 2018), it is now widely rec-
ognized that NLP tools encode and reﬂect con-
troversial social asymmetries for many seemingly
neutral tasks, machine translation (MT) included.
Admittedly, the problem is not new (Frank et al.,
2004). A few years ago, Schiebinger (2014) crit-
icized the phenomenon of “masculine default” in
MT after running one of her interviews through a
commercial translation system. In spite of several
feminine mentions in the text, she was repeatedlyreferred to by masculine pronouns. Gender-related
concerns have also been voiced by online MT users,
who noticed how commercial systems entrench so-
cial gender expectations, e.g., translating engineers
as masculine and nurses as feminine (Olson, 2018).
With language technologies entering widespread
use and being deployed at a massive scale, their so-
cietal impact has raised concern both within (Hovy
and Spruit, 2016; Bender et al., 2021) and outside
(Dastin, 2018) the scientiﬁc community. To take
stock of the situation, Sun et al. (2019) reviewed
NLP studies on the topic. However, their survey
is based on monolingual applications, whose un-
derlying assumptions and solutions may not be
directly applicable to languages other than English
(Zhou et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020; Takeshita
et al., 2020) and cross-lingual settings. Moreover,
MT is a multifaceted task, which requires resolving
multiple gender-related subtasks at the same time
(e.g., coreference resolution, named entity recogni-
tion). Hence, depending on the languages involved
and the factors accounted for, gender bias has been
conceptualized differently across studies. To date,
gender bias in MT has been tackled by means of a
narrow, problem-solving oriented approach. While
technical countermeasures are needed, failing to
adopt a wider perspective and engage with related
literature outside of NLP can be detrimental to the
advancement of the ﬁeld (Blodgett et al., 2020).
In this paper, we intend to put such literature to
use for the study of gender bias in MT. We go be-
yond surveys restricted to monolingual NLP (Sun
et al., 2019) or more limited in scope (Costa-juss `a,
2019; Monti, 2020), and present the ﬁrst compre-
hensive review of gender bias in MT. In particular,
we1)offer a uniﬁed framework that introduces
the concepts, sources, and effects of bias in MT,
clariﬁed in light of relevant notions on the relation
between gender and different languages; 2)criti-
cally discuss the state of the research by identifying
blind spots and key challenges.arXiv:2104.06001v3  [cs.CL]  7 May 2021
2 Bias statement
Bias is a fraught term with partially overlapping, or
even competing, deﬁnitions (Campolo et al., 2017).
In cognitive science, bias refers to the possible
outcome of heuristics, i.e., mental shortcuts that
can be critical to support prompt reactions (Tver-
sky and Kahneman, 1973, 1974). AI research bor-
rowed from such a tradition (Rich and Gureckis,
2019; Rahwan et al., 2019) and conceived bias as
the divergence from an ideal or expected value
(Glymour and Herington, 2019; Shah et al., 2020),
which can occur if models rely on spurious cues
and unintended shortcut strategies to predict out-
puts (Schuster et al., 2019; McCoy et al., 2019;
Geirhos et al., 2020). Since this can lead to sys-
tematic errors and/or adverse social effects, bias
investigation is not only a scientiﬁc and techni-
cal endeavour but also an ethical one, given the
growing societal role of NLP applications (Bender
and Friedman, 2018). As Blodgett et al. (2020)
recently called out, and has been endorsed in other
venues (Hardmeier et al., 2021), analysing bias
is an inherently normative process which requires
identifying what is deemed as harmful behavior,
how, and to whom . Hereby, we stress a human-
centered, sociolinguistically-motivated framing of
bias. By drawing on the deﬁnition by Friedman
and Nissenbaum (1996), we consider as biased an
MT model that systematically andunfairly discrim-
inates against certain individuals or groups in favor
of others. We identify bias per speciﬁc model’s
behaviors, which are assessed by envisaging their
potential risks when the model is deployed (Bender
et al., 2021) and the harms that could ensue (Craw-
ford, 2017), with people in focus (Bender, 2019).
Since MT systems are daily employed by millions
of individuals, they could impact a wide array of
people in different ways.
As a guide, we rely on Crawford (2017), who
deﬁnes two main categories of harms produced by
a biased system: i)Representational harms (R)
– i.e., detraction from the representation of social
groups and their identity, which, in turn, affects
attitudes and beliefs; ii)Allocational harms (A)
– i.e., a system allocates or withholds opportuni-
ties or resources to certain groups. Considering
the so far reported real-world instances of gender
bias (Schiebinger, 2014; Olson, 2018) and those
addressed in the MT literature reviewed in this
paper, (R)can be further distinguished into under-
representation andstereotyping .Under-representation refers to the reduction of
the visibility of certain social groups through lan-
guage by i)producing a disproportionately low rep-
resentation of women (e.g., most feminine entities
in a text are misrepresented as male in translation);
orii)not recognizing the existence of non-binary
individuals (e.g., when a system does not account
for gender neutral forms). For such cases, the mis-
representation occurs in the language employed to
talk “about” such groups.1Also, this harm can
imply the reduced visibility of the language used
“by” speakers of such groups by iii)failing to re-
ﬂect their identity and communicative repertoires.
In these cases, an MT ﬂattens their communica-
tion and produces an output that indexes unwanted
gender identities and social meanings (e.g. women
and non-binary speakers are not referred to by their
preferred linguistic expressions of gender).
Stereotyping regards the propagation of negative
generalizations of a social group, e.g., belittling
feminine representation to less prestigious occu-
pations (teacher (Feminine) vs. lecturer (Mascu-
line)), or in association with attractiveness judg-
ments (pretty lecturer (Feminine)).
Such behaviors are harmful as they can directly
affect the self-esteem of members of the target
group (Bourguignon et al., 2015). Additionally,
they can propagate to indirect stakeholders. For
instance, if a system fosters the visibility of the
way of speaking of the dominant group, MT users
can presume that such a language represents the
most appropriate or prestigious variant2– at the
expense of other groups and communicative reper-
toires. These harms can aggregate, and the ubiq-
uitous embedding of MT in web applications pro-
vides us with paradigmatic examples of how the
two types of (R)can interplay. For example, if
women or non-binary3scientists are the subjects
of a query, automatically translated pages run the
risk of referring to them via masculine-inﬂected
job qualiﬁcations. Such misrepresentations can
lead to experience feelings of identity invalidation
(Zimman et al., 2017). Also, users may not be
aware of being exposed to MT mistakes due to the
deceptively ﬂuent output of a system (Martindale
and Carpuat, 2018). In the long run, stereotypi-
1See also the classiﬁcations by Dinan et al. (2020).
2For an analogy on how technology shaped the perception
of feminine voices as shrill and immature, see Tallon (2019).
3Throughout the paper, we use non-binary as an umbrella
term for referring to all gender identities between or outside
the masculine/feminine binary categories.
cal assumptions and prejudices (e.g., only men are
qualiﬁed for high-level positions) will be reinforced
(Levesque, 2011; R ´egner et al., 2019).
Regarding (A), MT services are consumed by
the general public and can thus be regarded as re-
sources in their own right. Hence, (R)can directly
imply (A)as a performance disparity across users
in the quality of service , i.e., the overall efﬁciency
of the service. Accordingly, a woman attempting
to translate her biography by relying on an MT sys-
tem requires additional energy and time to revise
wrong masculine references. If such disparities are
not accounted for, the MT ﬁeld runs the risk of
producing systems that prevent certain groups from
fully beneﬁting from such technological resources.
In the following, we operationalize such cate-
gories to map studies on gender bias to their moti-
vations and societal implications (Table 1 and 2).
3 Understanding Bias
To confront bias in MT, it is vital to reach out to
other disciplines that foregrounded how the socio-
cultural notions of gender interact with language(s),
translation, and implicit biases. Only then can
we discuss the multiple factors that concur to en-
code and amplify gender inequalities in language
technology. Note that, except for Saunders et al.
(2020), current studies on gender bias in MT have
assumed an (often implicit) binary vision of gender.
As such, our discussion is largely forced into this
classiﬁcation. Although we reiterate on bimodal
feminine/masculine linguistic forms and social cat-
egories, we emphasize that gender encompasses
multiple biosocial elements not to be conﬂated with
sex (Risman, 2018; Fausto-Sterling, 2019), and that
some individuals do not experience gender, at all,
or in binary terms (Glen and Hurrell, 2012).
3.1 Gender and Language
The relation between language and gender is not
straightforward. First, the linguistic structures used
to refer to the extra-linguistic reality of gender vary
across languages (x3.1.1). Moreover, how gender
is assigned and perceived in our verbal practices de-
pends on contextual factors as well as assumptions
about social roles, traits, and attributes ( x3.1.2). At
last, language is conceived as a tool for articulating
and constructing personal identities ( x3.1.3).
3.1.1 Linguistic Encoding of Gender
Drawing on (Corbett, 1991; Craig, 1994; Comrie,
1999; Hellinger and Bußman, 2001, 2002, 2003;Corbett, 2013; Gygax et al., 2019) we hereby de-
scribe the linguistic forms (lexical, pronominal,
grammatical) that bear a relation with the extra-
linguistic reality of gender. Following Stahlberg
et al. (2007), we identify three language groups:
Genderless languages (e.g., Finnish, Turkish).
In such languages, the gender-speciﬁc repertoire
is at its minimum, only expressed for basic lexical
pairs, usually kinship or address terms (e.g., in
Finnish sisko /sister vs. veli/brother).
Notional gender languages4(e.g., Danish, En-
glish). On top of lexical gender ( mom /dad), such
languages display a system of pronominal gender
(she/he ,her/him ). English also hosts some marked
derivative nouns ( actor /actress ) and compounds
(chairman /chairwoman ).
Grammatical gender languages (e.g., Arabic,
Spanish). In these languages, each noun pertains
to a class such as masculine, feminine, and neuter
(if present). Although for most inanimate objects
gender assignment is only formal,5for human ref-
erents masculine/feminine markings are assigned
on a semantic basis. Grammatical gender is deﬁned
by a system of morphosyntactic agreement, where
several parts of speech beside the noun (e.g., verbs,
determiners, adjectives) carry gender inﬂections.
In light of the above, the English sentence
“He/She is a good friend” has no overt expression
of gender in a genderless language like Turkish (“ O
iyi bir arkada s ¸”), whereas Spanish spreads several
masculine or feminine markings (“ El/laesun/a
buen/ aamig o/a”). Although general, such macro-
categories allow us to highlight typological differ-
ences across languages. These are crucial to frame
gender issues in both human and machine transla-
tion. Also, they exhibit to what extent speakers of
each group are led to think and communicate via bi-
nary distinctions,6as well as underline the relative
complexity in carving out a space for lexical in-
novations which encode non-binary gender (Hord,
2016; Conrod, 2020). In this sense, while English
is bringing the singular they in common use and
developing neo-pronouns (Bradley et al., 2019), for
grammatical gender languages like Spanish neu-
4Also referred to as natural gender languages. Following
McConnell-Ginet (2013), we prefer notional to avoid termino-
logical overlapping with “natural”, i.e., biological/anatomical
sexual categories. For a wider discussion on the topic, see
Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg (1993); Curzan (2003).
5E.g., “moon” is masculine in German, feminine in French.
6Outside of the Western paradigm, there are cultures whose
languages traditionally encode gender outside of the binary
(Epple, 1998; Murray, 2003; Hall and O’Donovan, 2014).
trality requires the development of neo-morphemes
(“Elleesunebuene amigue ”).
3.1.2 Social Gender Connotations
To understand gender bias, we have to grasp not
only the structure of different languages, but also
how linguistic expressions are connoted, deployed,
and perceived (Hellinger and Motschenbacher,
2015). In grammatical gender languages, feminine
forms are often subject to a so-called semantic dero-
gation (Schulz, 1975), e.g., in French, couturier
(fashion designer) vs. couturi `ere(seamstress). En-
glish is no exception (e.g., governor /governess ).
Moreover, bias can lurk underneath seemingly
neutral forms. Such is the case of epicene (i.e., gen-
der neutral) nouns where gender is not grammati-
cally marked. Here, gender assignment is linked
to (typically binary) social gender, i.e., “the so-
cially imposed dichotomy of masculine and femi-
nine role and character traits” (Kramarae and Tre-
ichler, 1985). As an illustration, Danish speakers
tend to pronominalize dommer (judge) with han
(he) when referring to the whole occupational cate-
gory (Gomard, 1995; Nissen, 2002). Social gender
assignment varies across time and space (Lyons,
1977; Romaine, 1999; Cameron, 2003) and regards
stereotypical assumptions about what is typical or
appropriate for men and women. Such assumptions
impact our perceptions (Hamilton, 1988; Gygax
et al., 2008; Kreiner et al., 2008) and inﬂuence our
behavior – e.g., leading individuals to identify with
and fulﬁll stereotypical expectations (Wolter and
Hannover, 2016; Sczesny et al., 2018) – and verbal
communication, e.g., women are often misquoted
in the academic community (Krawczyk, 2017).
Translation studies highlight how social gender
assignment inﬂuences translation choices (Jakob-
son, 1959; Chamberlain, 1988; Comrie, 1999;
Di Sabato and Perri, 2020). Primarily, the prob-
lem arises from typological differences across lan-
guages and their gender systems. Nonetheless,
socio-cultural factors also inﬂuence how transla-
tors deal with such differences. Consider the char-
acter of the cook in Daphne du Maurier’s “Re-
becca”, whose gender is never explicitly stated in
the whole book. In the lack of any available in-
formation, translators of ﬁve grammatical gender
languages represented the character as either a man
or a woman (Wandruszka, 1969; Nissen, 2002).
Although extreme, this case can illustrate the sit-
uation of uncertainty faced by MT: the mapping
of one-to-many forms in gender prediction. But,as discussed inx4.1, mistranslations occur when
contextual gender information is available as well.
3.1.3 Gender and Language Use
Language use varies between demographic groups
and reﬂects their backgrounds, personalities, and
social identities (Labov, 1972; Trudgill, 2000; Pen-
nebaker and Stone, 2003). In this light, the study of
gender and language variation has received much
attention in socio- and corpus linguistics (Holmes
and Meyerhoff, 2003; Eckert and McConnell-Ginet,
2013). Research conducted in speech and text
analysis highlighted several gender differences,
which are exhibited at the phonological and lexical-
syntactic level. For example, women rely more
on hedging strategies (“it seems that”), purpose
clauses (“in order to”), ﬁrst-person pronouns, and
prosodic exclamations (Mulac et al., 2001; Mon-
dorf, 2002; Brownlow et al., 2003). Although some
correspondences between gender and linguistic fea-
tures hold across cultures and languages (Smith,
2003; Johannsen et al., 2015), it should be kept in
mind that they are far from universal7and should
not be intended in a stereotyped and oversimpliﬁed
manner (Bergvall et al., 1996; Nguyen et al., 2016;
Koolen and van Cranenburgh, 2017).
Drawing on gender-related features proved use-
ful to build demographically informed NLP tools
(Garimella et al., 2019) and personalized MT mod-
els (Mirkin et al., 2015; Bawden et al., 2016; Ra-
binovich et al., 2017). However, using personal
gender as a variable requires a prior understanding
of which categories may be salient, and a critical
reﬂection on how gender is intended and ascribed
(Larson, 2017). Otherwise, if we assume that the
only relevant (sexual) categories are “male” and
“female”, our models will inevitably fulﬁll such a
reductionist expectation (Bamman et al., 2014).
3.2 Gender Bias in MT
To date, an overview of how several factors may
contribute to gender bias in MT does not exist. We
identify and clarify concurring problematic causes,
accounting for the context in which systems are
developed and used ( x2). To this aim, we rely on
the three overarching categories of bias described
by Friedman and Nissenbaum (1996), which fore-
7It has been largely debated whether gender-related differ-
ences are inherently biological or cultural and social products
(Mulac et al., 2001). Currently, the idea that they depend on
biological reasons is largely rejected (Hyde, 2005) in favor of
a socio-cultural or performative perspective (Butler, 1990).
ground different sources that can lead to machine
bias. These are: pre-existing bias – rooted in our
institutions, practices and attitudes ( x3.2.1), techni-
cal bias – due to technical constraints and decisions
(x3.2.2), and emergent bias – arising from the in-
teraction between systems and users ( x3.2.3). We
consider such categories as placed along a contin-
uum, rather than being discrete.
3.2.1 Pre-existing Bias
MT models are known to reﬂect gender dispari-
ties present in the data. However, reﬂections on
such generally invoked disparities are often over-
looked. Treating data as an abstract, monolithic
entity (Gitelman, 2013) – or relying on “overly
broad/overloaded terms like training data bias ”8
(Suresh and Guttag, 2019) – do not encourage rea-
soning on the many factors of which data are the
product. First and foremost, the historical, socio-
cultural context in which they are generated.
A starting point to tackle these issues is the Eu-
roparl corpus (Koehn, 2005), where only 30% of
sentences are uttered by women (Vanmassenhove
et al., 2018). Such an imbalance is a direct window
into the glass ceiling that has hampered women’s
access to parliamentary positions. This case exem-
pliﬁes how data might be “tainted with historical
bias”, mirroring an “unequal ground truth” (Hacker,
2018). However, other gender variables are harder
to spot and quantify.
Empirical linguistics research pointed out that
subtle gender asymmetries are rooted in languages’
use and structure. For instance, an important aspect
regards how women are referred to. Femaleness is
often explicitly invoked when there is no textual
need to do so, even in languages that do not require
overt gender marking. A case in point regards
Turkish, which differentiates cocuk (child) and kiz
cocugu (female child) (Braun, 2000). Similarly, in
a corpus search, Romaine (2001) found 155 explicit
female markings for doctor (female, woman or lady
doctor), compared to only 14 male doctor . Feminist
language critique provided extensive analysis of
such a phenomenon by highlighting how referents
in discourse are considered men by default unless
explicitly stated (Silveira, 1980; Hamilton, 1991).
Finally, prescriptive top-down guidelines limit the
linguistic visibility of gender diversity, e.g., the
Real Academia de la Lengua Espa ˜nola recently
discarded the ofﬁcial use of non-binary innovations
8See (Johnson, 2020a; Samar, 2020) for a discussion on
how such narrative can be counterproductive for tackling bias.and claimed the functionality of masculine generics
(Mundo, 2018; L ´opez et al., 2020).
By stressing such issues, we are not condoning
the reproduction of pre-existing bias in MT. Rather,
the above-mentioned concerns are the starting point
to account for when dealing with gender bias.
3.2.2 Technical Bias
Technical bias comprises aspects related to data
creation, models design, training and testing pro-
cedures. If present in training and testing samples,
asymmetries in the semantics of language use and
gender distribution are respectively learnt by MT
systems and rewarded in their evaluation. However,
as just discussed, biased representations are not
merely quantitative, but also qualitative. Accord-
ingly, straightforward procedures – e.g., balancing
the number of speakers in existing datasets – do
not ensure a fairer representation of gender in MT
outputs. Since datasets are a crucial source of bias,
it is also crucial to advocate for a careful data cu-
ration (Mehrabi et al., 2019; Paullada et al., 2020;
Hanna et al., 2021; Bender et al., 2021), guided
by pragmatically- and socially-informed analyses
(Hitti et al., 2019; Sap et al., 2020; Devinney et al.,
2020) and annotation practices (Gaido et al., 2020).
Overall, while data can mirror gender inequali-
ties and offer adverse shortcut learning opportuni-
ties, it is “quite clear that data alone rarely constrain
a model sufﬁciently” (Geirhos et al., 2020) nor ex-
plain the fact that models overamplify (Shah et al.,
2020) such inequalities in their outputs. Focusing
on models’ components, Costa-juss `a et al. (2020b)
demonstrate that architectural choices in multilin-
gual MT impact the systems’ behavior: shared
encoder-decoders retain less gender information
in the source embeddings and less diversion in the
attention than language-speciﬁc encoder-decoders
(Escolano et al., 2021), thus disfavoring the gen-
eration of feminine forms. While discussing the
loss and decay of certain words in translation, Van-
massenhove et al. (2019, 2021) attest to the ex-
istence of an algorithmic bias that leads under-
represented forms in the training data – as it may
be the case for feminine references – to further
decrease in the MT output. Speciﬁcally, Roberts
et al. (2020) prove that beam search – unlike sam-
pling – is skewed toward the generation of more
frequent (masculine) pronouns, as it leads models
to an extreme operating point that exhibits zero
variability.
Thus, efforts towards understating and mitigat-
ing gender bias should also account for the model
front. To date, this remains largely unexplored.
3.2.3 Emergent Bias
Emergent bias may arise when a system is used
in a different context than the one it was designed
for, e.g., when it is applied to another demographic
group. From car crash dummies to clinical trials,
we have evidence of how not accounting for gender
differences brings to the creation of male-grounded
products with dire consequences (Liu and Dipi-
etro Mager, 2016; Criado-Perez, 2019), such as
higher death and injury risks in vehicle crash and
less effective medical treatments for women. Simi-
larly, unbeknownst to their creators, MT systems
that are not intentionally envisioned for a diverse
range of users will not generalize for the feminine
segment of the population. Hence, in the interac-
tion with an MT system, a woman will likely be
misgendered or not have her linguistic style pre-
served (Hovy et al., 2020). Other conditions of
users/system mismatch may be the result of chang-
ing societal knowledge and values. A case in point
regards Google Translate’s historical decision to
adjust its system for instances of gender ambigu-
ity. Since its launch twenty years ago, Google
had provided only one translation for single-word
gender-ambiguous queries (e.g., professor trans-
lated in Italian with the masculine professore ). In
a community increasingly conscious of the power
of language to hardwire stereotypical beliefs and
women’s invisibility (Lindqvist et al., 2019; Beuke-
boom and Burgers, 2019), the bias exhibited by
the system was confronted with a new sensitivity.
The service’s decision (Kuczmarski, 2018) to pro-
vide a double feminine/masculine output ( profes-
sor!professoressajprofessore ) stems from current
demands for gender-inclusive resolutions. For the
recognition of non-binary groups (Richards et al.,
2016), we invite studies on how such modeling
could be integrated with neutral strategies ( x6).
4 Assessing Bias
First accounts on gender bias in MT date back to
Frank et al. (2004). Their manual analysis pointed
out how English-German MT suffers from a dearth
of linguistic competence, as it shows severe difﬁ-
culties in recovering syntactic and semantic infor-
mation to correctly produce gender agreement.
Similar inquiries were conducted on other tar-
get grammatical gender languages for several com-
mercial MT systems (Abu-Ayyash, 2017; Monti,2017; Rescigno et al., 2020). While these stud-
ies focused on contrastive phenomena, Schiebinger
(2014)9went beyond linguistic insights, calling for
a deeper understanding of gender bias. Her article
on Google Translate’s “masculine default” behav-
ior emphasized how such a phenomenon is related
to the larger issue of gender inequalities, also per-
petuated by socio-technical artifacts (Selbst et al.,
2019). All in all, these qualitative analyses demon-
strated that gender problems encompass all three
MT paradigms (neural, statistical, and rule-based),
preparing the ground for quantitative work.
To attest the existence and scale of gender bias
across several languages, dedicated benchmarks,
evaluations, and experiments have been designed.
We ﬁrst discuss large scale analyses aimed at as-
sessing gender bias in MT, grouped according to
two main conceptualizations: i)works focusing
on the weight of prejudices and stereotypes in MT
(x4.1); ii)studies assessing whether gender is prop-
erly preserved in translation ( x4.2). In accordance
with the human-centered approach embraced in this
survey, in Table 1 we map each work to the harms
(seex2) ensuing from the biased behaviors they
assess. Finally, we review existing benchmarks for
comparing MT performance across genders ( x4.3).
4.1 MT and Gender Stereotypes
In MT, we record prior studies concerned with pro-
noun translation and coreference resolution across
typologically different languages accounting for
both animate and inanimate referents (Hardmeier
and Federico, 2010; Le Nagard and Koehn, 2010;
Guillou, 2012). For the speciﬁc analysis on gender
bias, instead, such tasks are exclusively studied in
relation to human entities.
Prates et al. (2018) and Cho et al. (2019) design
a similar setting to assess gender bias. Prates et al.
(2018) investigate pronoun translation from 12 gen-
derless languages into English. Retrieving 1,000
job positions from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics, they build simple constructions like the Hun-
garian “ ˝oegym´ern¨ok” (“he/she is an engineer ”).
Following the same template, Cho et al. (2019)
extend the analysis to Korean-English including
both occupations and sentiment words (e.g., kind).
As their samples are ambiguous by design, the ob-
served predictions of he/she pronouns should be
9See also Schiebinger’s project
Gendered Innovations : http://
genderedinnovations :stanford :edu/case-
studies/nlp :html
random, yet they show a strong masculine skew.10
To further analyze the under-representation of
shepronouns, Prates et al. (2018) focus on 22
macro-categories of occupation areas and compare
the proportion of pronoun predictions against the
real-world proportion of men and women employed
in such sectors. In this way, they ﬁnd that MT
not only yields a masculine default, but it also un-
derestimates feminine frequency at a greater rate
than occupation data alone suggest. Such an analy-
sis starts by acknowledging pre-existing bias (see
x3.2.1) – e.g., low rates of women in STEM – to
attest the existence of machine bias, and deﬁnes it
as the exacerbation of actual gender disparities.
Going beyond word lists and simple synthetic
constructions, Gonen and Webster (2020) inspect
the translation into Russian, Spanish, German, and
French of natural yet ambiguous English sentences.
Their analysis on the ratio and type of generated
masculine/feminine job titles consistently exhibits
social asymmetries for target grammatical gender
languages (e.g., lecturer masculine vs. teacher
feminine). Finally, Stanovsky et al. (2019) assess
that MT is skewed to the point of actually ignoring
explicit feminine gender information in source En-
glish sentences. For instance, MT systems yield a
wrong masculine translation of the job title baker ,
although it is referred to by the pronoun she. Beside
the overlook of overt gender mentions, the model’s
reliance on unintended (and irrelevant) cues for gen-
der assignment is further conﬁrmed by the fact that
adding a socially connoted – but formally epicene –
adjective (the pretty baker) pushes models toward
feminine inﬂections in translation.
We observe that the propagation of stereotypes
is a widely researched form of gender asymmetries
in MT, one that so far has been largely narrowed
down to occupational stereotyping. After all, occu-
pational stereotyping has been studied by different
disciplines (Greenwald et al., 1998) attested across
cultures (Lewis and Lupyan, 2020), and it can be
easily detected in MT across multiple language di-
rections with consistent results. Current research
should not neglect other stereotyping dynamics, as
in the case of Stanovsky et al. (2019) and Cho et al.
10Cho et al. (2019) highlight that a higher frequency of fem-
inine references in the MT output does not necessarily imply a
bias reduction. Rather, it may reﬂect gender stereotypes, as for
hairdresser that is skewed toward feminine. This observation
points to the tension between frequency count, suitable for
testing under-representation, and qualitative-oriented analysis
on bias conceptualized in terms of stereotyping.(2019), who include associations to physical char-
acteristics or psychological traits. Also, the intrinsi-
cally contextual nature of societal expectations ad-
vocates for the study of culture-speciﬁc dimensions
of bias. Finally, we signal that the BERT-based
perturbation method by Webster et al. (2019) iden-
tiﬁes other bias-susceptible nouns that tend to be
assigned to a speciﬁc gender (e.g., ﬁghter as mas-
culine). As Blodgett (2021) underscores, however,
“the existence of these undesirable correlations is
not sufﬁcient to identify them as normatively un-
desirable”. It should thus be investigated whether
such statistical preferences can cause harms, e.g.,
by checking if they map to existing harmful associ-
ations or quality of service disparities.
4.2 MT and Gender Preservation
Vanmassenhove et al. (2018) and Hovy et al. (2020)
investigate whether speakers’ gender11is properly
reﬂected in MT. This line of research is preceded
by ﬁndings on gender personalization of statisti-
cal MT (Mirkin et al., 2015; Bawden et al., 2016;
Rabinovich et al., 2017), which claim that gender
“signals” are weakened in translation.
Hovy et al. (2020) conjecture the existence of
age and gender stylistic bias due to models’ under-
exposure to the writings of women and younger
segments of the population. To test this hypoth-
esis, they automatically translate a corpus of on-
line reviews with available metadata about users
(Hovy et al., 2015). Then, they compare such demo-
graphic information with the prediction of age and
gender classiﬁers run on the MT output. Results
indicate that different commercial MT models sys-
tematically make authors “sound” older and male.
Their study thus concerns the under-representation
of the language used “by” certain speakers and
how it is perceived (Blodgett, 2021). However,
the authors do not inspect which linguistic choices
MT overproduces, nor which stylistic features may
characterize different socio-demographic groups.
Still starting from the assumption that demo-
graphic factors inﬂuence language use, Vanmassen-
hove et al. (2018) probe MT’s ability to preserve
speaker’s gender translating from English into ten
languages. To this aim, they develop gender-
informed MT models (see x5.1), whose outputs
are compared with those obtained by their base-
line counterparts. Tested on a set for spoken lan-
11Note that these studies distinguish speakers into fe-
male/male. As discussed in x3.1.3, we invite a reﬂection
on the appropriateness and use of such categories.
guage translation (Koehn, 2005), their enhanced
models show consistent gains in terms of overall
quality when translating into grammatical gender
languages, where speaker’s references are often
marked. For instance, the French translation of
“I’m happy ” is either “Je suis heureuse “ or “Je
suishereux ” for a female/male speaker respectively.
Through a focused cross-gender analysis – carried
out by splitting their English-French test set into
1st person male vs. female data – they assess that
the largest margin of improvement for their gender-
informed approach concerns sentences uttered by
women, since the results of their baseline disclose a
quality of service disparity in favor of male speak-
ers. Besides morphological agreement, they also
attribute such improvement to the fact that their
enhanced model produces gendered preferences in
other word choices. For instance, it opts for think
rather than believe , which is in concordance with
corpus studies claiming a tendency for women to
use less assertive speech (Newman et al., 2008).
Note that the authors rely on manual analysis to
ascribe performance differences to gender-related
features. In fact, global evaluations on generic test
sets alone are inadequate to pointedly measure gen-
der bias.
4.3 Existing Benchmarks
MT outputs are typically evaluated against refer-
ence translations employing standard metrics such
as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) or TER (Snover
et al., 2006). This procedure poses two chal-
lenges. First, these metrics provide coarse-grained
scores for translation quality, as they treat all er-
rors equally and are rather insensitive to speciﬁc
linguistic phenomena (Sennrich, 2017). Second,
generic test sets containing the same gender imbal-
ance present in the training data can reward biased
predictions. Hereby, we describe the publicly avail-
able MT Gender Bias Evaluation Testsets (GBETs)
(Sun et al., 2019), i.e., benchmarks designed to
probe gender bias by isolating the impact of gender
from other factors that may affect systems’ perfor-
mance. Note that different benchmarks and met-
rics respond to different conceptualizations of bias
(Barocas et al., 2019). Common to them all in MT,
however, is that biased behaviors are formalized
by using some variants of averaged performance12
12This is a value-laden option (Birhane et al., 2020), and
not the only possible one (Mitchell et al., 2020). For a broader
discussion on measurement and bias we refer the reader also
to (Jacobs, 2021; Jacobs et al., 2020).disparities across gender groups, comparing the ac-
curacy of gender predictions on an equal number
of masculine, feminine, and neutral references.
Escud ´e Font and Costa-juss `a (2019) developed
the bilingual English-Spanish Occupations test
set. It consists of 1,000 sentences equally dis-
tributed across genders. The phrasal structure
envisioned for their sentences is “I’ve known
fherjhimj<proper noun >gfor a long time, my
friend works asfajang<occupation >”. The evalu-
ation focuses on the translation of the noun friend
into Spanish ( amig o/a). Since gender information
is present in the source context and sentences are
the same for both masculine/feminine participants,
an MT system exhibits gender bias if it disregards
relevant context and cannot provide the correct
translation of friend at the same rate across genders.
Stanovsky et al. (2019) created WinoMT by
concatenating two existing English GBETs for
coreference resolution (Rudinger et al., 2018; Zhao
et al., 2018a). The corpus consists of 3,888 Wino-
gradesque sentences presenting two human entities
deﬁned by their role and a subsequent pronoun that
needs to be correctly resolved to one of the entities
(e.g., “The lawyer yelled at the hairdresser because
hedid a bad job”). For each sentence, there are two
variants with either heorshepronouns, so as to
cast the referred annotated entity ( hairdresser ) into
a proto- or anti-stereotypical gender role. By trans-
lating WinoMT into grammatical gender languages,
one can thus measure systems’ ability to resolve
the anaphoric relation and pick the correct femi-
nine/masculine inﬂection for the occupational noun.
On top of quantifying under-representation as the
difference between the total amount of translated
feminine and masculine references, the subdivision
of the corpus into proto- and anti-stereotypical sets
also allows verifying if MT predictions correlate
with occupational stereotyping.
Finally, Saunders et al. (2020) enriched the origi-
nal version of WinoMT in two different ways. First,
they included a third gender-neutral case based on
the singular they pronoun, thus paving the way
to account for non-binary referents. Second, they
labeled the entity in the sentence which is not coref-
erent with the pronoun ( lawyer ). The latter anno-
tation is used to verify the shortcomings of some
mitigating approaches as discussed in x5.
The above-mentioned corpora are known as chal-
lenge sets , consisting of sentences created ad hoc
for diagnostic purposes. In this way, they can
Study Benchmark Gender Harms
(Prates et al., 2018) Synthetic, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics b R: under-rep, stereotyping
(Cho et al., 2019) Synthetic equity evaluation corpus (EEC) b R: under-rep, stereotyping
(Gonen and Webster, 2020) BERT-based perturbations on natural sentences b R: under-rep, stereotyping
(Stanovsky et al., 2019) WinoMT b R: under-rep, stereotyping
(Vanmassenhove et al., 2018) Europarl (generic) b A: quality
(Hovy et al., 2020) Trustpilot (reviews with gender and age) b R: under-rep
Table 1: For each Study , the Table shows on which Benchmark gender bias is assessed, how Gender is intended (here only
in binary (b) terms). Finally, we indicate which (R)epresentational – under-representation andstereotyping – or (A)llocational
Harm – as reduced quality of service – is addressed in the study.
be used to quantify bias related to stereotyping
and under-representation in a sound environment.
However, since they consist of a limited variety of
synthetic gender-related phenomena, they hardly
address the variety of challenges posed by real-
world language and are relatively easy to overﬁt.
As recognized by Rudinger et al. (2018) “they may
demonstrate the presence of gender bias in a sys-
tem, but not prove its absence”.
The Arabic Parallel Gender Corpus (Habash
et al., 2019) includes an English-Arabic test set13
retrieved from OpenSubtitles natural language data
(Lison and Tiedemann, 2016). Each of the 2,448
sentences in the set exhibits a ﬁrst person sin-
gular reference to the speaker (e.g., “I’m rich”).
Among them,200 English sentences require gen-
der agreement to be assigned in translation. These
were translated into Arabic in both gender forms,
obtaining a quantitatively and qualitatively equal
amount of sentence pairs with annotated mascu-
line/feminine references. This natural corpus thus
allows for cross-gender evaluations on MT produc-
tion of correct speaker’s gender agreement.
MuST-SHE (Bentivogli et al., 2020) is a natu-
ral benchmark for three language pairs (English-
French/Italian/Spanish). Built on TED talks data
(Cattoni et al., 2021), for each language pair it
comprises1,000 ( audio ,transcript ,translation )
triplets, thus allowing evaluation for both MT and
speech translation (ST). Its samples are balanced
between masculine and feminine phenomena, and
incorporate two types of constructions: i)sentences
referring to the speaker (e.g., “ Iwasborn in Mum-
bai”), and ii)sentences that present contextual in-
formation to disambiguate gender (e.g., “My mum
wasborn in Mumbai”). Since every gender-marked
word in the target language is annotated in the cor-
pus, MuST-SHE grants the advantage of comple-
menting BLEU- and accuracy-based evaluations on
13Overall, the corpus comprises over 12,000 annotated sen-
tences and 200,000 synthetic sentences.gender translation for a great variety of phenomena.
Unlike challenge sets, natural corpora quantify
whether MT yields reduced feminine representa-
tion in authentic conditions and whether the quality
of service varies across speakers of different gen-
ders. However, as they treat all gender-marked
words equally, it is not possible to identify if the
model is propagating stereotypical representations.
All in all, we stress that each test set and metric
is only a proxy for framing a phenomenon or an
ability (e.g., anaphora resolution), and an approxi-
mation of what we truly intend to gauge. Thus, as
we discuss inx6, advances in MT should account
for the observation of gender bias in real-world
conditions to avoid that achieving high scores on
a mathematically formalized esteem could lead to
a false sense of security. Still, benchmarks remain
valuable tools to monitor models’ behavior. As
such, we remark that evaluation procedures ought
to cover both models’ general performance and
gender-related issues. This is crucial to establish
the capabilities and limits of mitigating strategies.
5 Mitigating Bias
To attenuate gender bias in MT, different strategies
dealing with input data, learning algorithms, and
model outputs have been proposed. As attested
by Birhane et al. (2020), since advancements are
oftentimes exclusively reported in terms of values
internal to the machine learning ﬁeld (e.g efﬁciency,
performance), it is not clear how such strategies
are meeting societal needs by reducing MT-related
harms. In order to conciliate technical perspectives
with the intended social purpose, in Table 2 we map
each mitigating approach to the harms (see x2) they
are meant to alleviate, as well as to the benchmark
their effectiveness is evaluated against. Comple-
mentarily, we hereby describe each approach by
means of two categories: model debiasing ( x5.1)
and debiasing through external components ( x5.2).
Approach Authors Benchmark Gender Harms
Gender tagging
(sentence-level)Vanmassenhove et al. Europarl (generic) b R: under-rep, A: quality
Elaraby et al. Open subtitles (generic) b R: under-rep, A: quality
Gender tagging
(word-level)Saunders et al. expanded WinoMT nb R: under-rep, stereotyping
Stafanovi ˇcs et al. WinoMT b R: under-rep, stereotyping
Adding context Basta et al. WinoMT b R: under-rep, stereotyping
Word-embeddings Escud ´e Font and Costa-juss `aOccupation test set b R: under-rep
Fine-tuning Costa-juss `a and de Jorge WinoMT b R: under-rep, stereotyping
Black-box injection Moryossef et al. Open subtitles (selected sample) b R: under-rep, A: quality
Lattice-rescoring Saunders and Byrne WinoMT b R: under-rep, steretoyping
Re-inﬂection Habash et al.; Alhafni et al. Arabic Parallel Gender Corpus b R: under-rep, A: quality
Table 2: For each Approach and related Authors , the Table shows on which Benchmark it is tested, if Gender is intended
in binary terms (b), or including non-binary (nb) identities. Finally, we indicate which (R)epresentational – under-representation
andstereotyping – or (A)llocational Harm – as reduced quality of service – the approach attempts to mitigate.
5.1 Model Debiasing
This line of work focuses on mitigating gender bias
through architectural changes of general-purpose
MT models or via dedicated training procedures.
Gender tagging. To improve the generation
of speaker’s referential markings, Vanmassenhove
et al. (2018) prepend a gender tag (M or F) to each
source sentence, both at training and inference time.
As their model is able to leverage this additional
information, the approach proves useful to handle
morphological agreement when translating from
English into French. However, this solution re-
quires additional metadata regarding the speakers’
gender that might not always be feasible to ac-
quire. Automatic annotation of speakers’ gender
(e.g., based on ﬁrst names) is not advisable, as it
runs the risk of introducing additional bias by mak-
ing unlicensed assumptions about one’s identity.
Elaraby et al. (2018) bypass this risk by deﬁning
a comprehensive set of cross-lingual gender agree-
ment rules based on POS tagging. In this way, they
identify speakers’ and listeners’ gender references
in an English-Arabic parallel corpus, which is con-
sequently labeled and used for training. The idea,
originally developed for spoken language transla-
tion in a two-way conversational setting, can be
adapted for other languages and scenarios by creat-
ing new dedicated rules. However, in realistic de-
ployment conditions where reference translations
are not available, gender information still has to be
externally supplied as metadata at inference time.
Stafanovi ˇcs et al. (2020) and Saunders et al.
(2020) explore the use of word-level gender tags.
While Stafanovi ˇcs et al. (2020) just report a gen-
der translation improvement, Saunders et al. (2020)
rely on the expanded version of WinoMT to iden-
tify a problem concerning gender tagging: it intro-duces noise if applied to sentences with references
to multiple participants, as it pushes their transla-
tion toward the same gender. Saunders et al. (2020)
also include a ﬁrst non-binary exploration of neu-
tral translation by exploiting an artiﬁcial dataset,
where neutral tags are added and gendered inﬂec-
tions are replaced by placeholders. The results are
however inconclusive, most likely due to the small
size and synthetic nature of their dataset.
Adding context. Without further information
needed for training or inference, Basta et al. (2020)
adopt a generic approach and concatenate each sen-
tence with its preceding one. By providing more
context, they attest a slight improvement in gender
translations requiring anaphorical coreference to be
solved in English-Spanish. This ﬁnding motivates
exploration at the document level, but it should be
validated with manual (Castilho et al., 2020) and in-
terpretability analyses since the added context can
be beneﬁcial for gender-unrelated reasons, such as
acting as a regularization factor (Kim et al., 2019).
Debiased word embeddings. The two above-
mentioned mitigations share the same intent: sup-
ply the model with additional gender knowledge.
Instead, Escud ´e Font and Costa-juss `a (2019) lever-
age pre-trained word embeddings, which are debi-
ased by using the hard-debiasing method proposed
by Bolukbasi et al. (2016) or the GN-GloVe algo-
rithm (Zhao et al., 2018b). These methods respec-
tively remove gender associations or isolate them
from the representations of English gender-neutral
words. Escud ´e Font and Costa-juss `a (2019) employ
such embeddings on the decoder side, the encoder
side, and both sides of an English-Spanish model.
The best results are obtained by leveraging GN-
GloVe embeddings on both encoder and decoder
sides, increasing BLEU scores and gender accuracy.
The authors generically apply debiasing methods
developed for English also to their target language.
However, being Spanish a grammatical gender lan-
guage, other language-speciﬁc approaches should
be considered to preserve the quality of the original
embeddings (Zhou et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020).
We also stress that it is debated whether depriving
systems of some knowledge and “blind” their per-
ceptions is the right path toward fairer language
models (Dwork et al., 2012; Caliskan et al., 2017;
Gonen and Goldberg, 2019; Nissim and van der
Goot, 2020). Also, Goldfarb-Tarrant et al. (2020)
ﬁnd that there is no reliable correlation between in-
trinsic evaluations of bias in word-embeddings and
cascaded effects on MT models’ biased behavior.
Balanced ﬁne-tuning. Costa-juss `a and de Jorge
(2020) rely on Gebiotoolkit (Costa-juss `a et al.,
2020c) to build gender-balanced datasets (i.e., fea-
turing an equal amount of masculine/feminine ref-
erences) based on Wikipedia biographies. By ﬁne-
tuning their models on such natural and more even
data, the generation of feminine forms is overall
improved. However, the approach is not as effec-
tive for gender translation on the anti-stereotypical
WinoMT set. As discussed in x3.2.2, they employ
a straightforward method that aims to increase the
amount of feminine Wikipedia pages in their train-
ing data. However, such coverage increase does not
mitigate stereotyping harms, as it does not account
for the qualitative different ways in which men and
women are portrayed (Wagner et al., 2015).
5.2 Debiasing through External Components
Instead of directly debiasing the MT model, these
mitigating strategies intervene in the inference
phase with external dedicated components. Such
approaches do not imply retraining, but introduce
the additional cost of maintaining separate modules
and handling their integration with the MT model.
Black-box injection. Moryossef et al. (2019)
attempt to control the production of feminine refer-
ences to the speaker and numeral inﬂections (plural
or singular) for the listener(s) in an English-Hebrew
spoken language setting. To this aim, they rely on
a short construction, such as “ shesaid to them ”,
which is prepended to the source sentence and then
removed from the MT output. Their approach is
simple, it can handle two types of information (gen-
der and number) for multiple entities (speaker and
listener), and improves systems’ ability to gener-
ate feminine target forms. However, as in the case
of Vanmassenhove et al. (2018) and Elaraby et al.(2018), it requires metadata about speakers and
listeners.
Lattice re-scoring. Saunders and Byrne (2020)
propose to post-process the MT output with a lat-
tice re-scoring module. This module exploits a
transducer to create a lattice by mapping gender
marked words in the MT output to all their possi-
ble inﬂectional variants. Developed for German,
Spanish, and Hebrew, all the sentences correspond-
ing to the paths in the lattice are re-scored with
another model, which has been gender-debiased
but at the cost of lower generic translation quality.
Then, the sentence with the highest probability is
picked as the ﬁnal output. When tested on WinoMT,
such an approach leads to an increase in the ac-
curacy of gender forms selection. Note that the
gender-debiased system is created by ﬁne-tuning
the model on an ad hoc built tiny set containing
a balanced amount of masculine/feminine forms.
Such an approach, also known as counterfactual
data augmentation (Lu et al., 2020), requires to
create identical pairs of sentences differing only
in terms of gender references. In fact, Saunders
and Byrne (2020) compile English sentences fol-
lowing this schema: “The <profession >ﬁnished
<hisjher>work”. Then, the sentences are auto-
matically translated and manually checked. In this
way, they obtain gender-balanced parallel corpus.
Thus, to implement their method for other language
pairs, the generation of new data is necessary. For
the ﬁne-tuning set, the effort required is limited
as the goal is to alleviate stereotypes by focusing
on a pre-deﬁned occupational lexicon. However,
data augmentation is very demanding for complex
sentences that represent a rich variety of gender
agreement phenomena14such as those occurring in
natural language scenarios.
Gender re-inﬂection. Habash et al. (2019)
and Alhafni et al. (2020) confront the problem
of speaker’s gender agreement in Arabic with a
post-processing component that re-inﬂects 1st per-
son references into masculine/feminine forms. In
Alhafni et al. (2020), the preferred gender of the
speaker and the translated Arabic sentence are fed
to the component, which re-inﬂects the sentence
in the desired form. In Habash et al. (2019) the
component can be: i) a two-step system that ﬁrst
identiﬁes the gender of 1st person references in
14Zmigrod et al. (2019) proposed an automatic approach for
augmenting data into morphologically-rich languages, but it
is only viable for simple constructions with one single entity.
an MT output, and then re-inﬂects them in the op-
posite form; ii) a single-step system that always
produces both forms from an MT output. Their
method does not necessarily require speakers’ gen-
der information: if metadata are supplied, the MT
output is re-inﬂected accordingly; differently, both
feminine/masculine inﬂections are offered (leaving
to the user the choice of the appropriate one). The
implementation of the re-inﬂection component was
made possible by the Arabic Parallel Gender Cor-
pus (seex4.3), which demanded an expensive work
of manual data creation. However, such corpus
grants research on English-Arabic the beneﬁts of
a wealth of gender-informed natural language data
that have been curated to avoid hetero-centrist inter-
pretations and preconceptions (e.g., proper names
and speakers of sentences like “that’s my wife” are
ﬂagged as gender-ambiguous). Along the same
line, Google Translate also delivers two outputs for
short gender-ambiguous queries (Johnson, 2020b).
Among languages with grammatical gender, the ser-
vice is currently available only for English-Spanish.
In light of the above, we remark that there is no
conclusive state-of-the-art method for mitigating
bias. The discussed interventions in MT tend to re-
spond to speciﬁc aspects of the problem with mod-
ular solutions, but if and how they can be integrated
within the same MT system remains unexplored.
As we have discussed through the survey, the um-
brella term “gender bias” refers to a wide array of
undesirable phenomena. Thus, it is unlikely that a
one-size-ﬁts-all solution will be able tackle prob-
lems that differ from one another, as they depend
on e.g., how bias is conceptualized, the language
combinations, the kinds of corpora used. As a re-
sult, we believe that generalization and scalability
should not be the only criteria against which miti-
gating strategies are valued. Conversely, we should
make room for openly context-aware interventions.
Finally, gender bias in MT is a socio-technical
problem. We thus highlight that engineering in-
terventions alone are not a panacea (Chang, 2019)
and should be integrated with long-term multidisci-
plinary commitment and practices (D’Ignazio and
Klein, 2020; Gebru, 2020) necessary to address
bias in our community, hence in its artifacts, too.
6 Conclusion and Key Challenges
As studies confronting gender bias in MT are
rapidly emerging, in this paper we presented them
within a uniﬁed framework to critically overviewcurrent conceptualizations and approaches to the
problem. Since gender bias is a multifaceted and
interdisciplinary issue, in our discussion we inte-
grated knowledge from related disciplines, which
can be instrumental to guide future research and
make it thrive. We conclude by suggesting several
directions that can help this ﬁeld going forward.
Model de-biasing. Neural networks rely on
easy-to-learn shortcuts or “cheap tricks” (Levesque,
2014), as picking up on spurious correlations of-
fered by training data can be easier for machines
than learning to actually solve a speciﬁc task. What
is “easy to learn” for a model depends on the induc-
tive bias (Sinz et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020) re-
sulting from architectural choices, training data and
learning rules. We think that explainability tech-
niques (Belinkov et al., 2020) represent a useful
tool to identify spurious cues (features) exploited
by the model during inference. Discerning them
can provide the research community with guid-
ance on how to improve models’ generalization
by working on data, architectures, loss functions
and optimizations. For instance, data responsi-
ble for spurious features (e.g., stereotypical cor-
relations) might be recognized and their weight
at training time might be lowered (Karimi Ma-
habadi et al., 2020). Besides, state-of-the-art ar-
chitectural choices and algorithms in MT have
mostly been studied in terms of overall transla-
tion quality without speciﬁc analyses regarding
gender translation. For instance, current systems
segment text into subword units with statistical
methods that can break the morphological struc-
ture of words, thus losing relevant semantic and
syntactic information in morphologically-rich lan-
guages (Niehues et al., 2016; Ataman et al., 2017).
Several languages show complex feminine forms,
typically derivative and created by adding a suf-
ﬁx to the masculine form, such as Lehrer/Lehrer in
(de), studente/studente ssa(it). It would be relevant
to investigate whether, compared to other segmenta-
tion techniques, statistical approaches disadvantage
(rarer and more complex) feminine forms. The MT
community should not overlook focused hypothe-
ses of such kind, as they can deepen our compre-
hension of the gender bias conundrum.
Non-textual modalities. Gender bias for non-
textual automatic translations (e.g., audiovisual)
has been largely neglected. In this sense, ST repre-
sents a small niche (Costa-juss `a et al., 2020a). For
the translation of speaker-related gender phenom-
ena, Bentivogli et al. (2020) prove that direct ST
systems exploit speaker’s vocal characteristics as a
gender cue to improve feminine translation. How-
ever, as addressed by Gaido et al. (2020), relying
on physical gender cues (e.g., pitch) for such task
implies reductionist gender classiﬁcations (Zim-
man, 2020) making systems potentially harmful
for a diverse range of users. Similarly, although
image-guided translation has been claimed useful
for gender translation since it relies on visual in-
puts for disambiguation (Frank et al., 2018; Ive
et al., 2019), it could bend toward stereotypical
assumptions about appearance. Further research
should explore such directions to identify potential
challenges and risks, by drawing on bias in im-
age captioning (van Miltenburg, 2019) and consoli-
dated studies from the ﬁelds of automatic gender
recognition and human-computer interaction (HCI)
(Hamidi et al., 2018; Keyes, 2018; May, 2019).
Beyond Dichotomies. Besides a few notable
exceptions for English NLP tasks (Manzini et al.,
2019; Cao and Daum ´e III, 2020; Sun et al., 2021)
and one in MT (Saunders et al., 2020), the discus-
sion around gender bias has been reduced to the
binary masculine/feminine dichotomy. Although
research in this direction is currently hampered by
the absence of data, we invite considering inclu-
sive solutions and exploring nuanced dimensions
of gender. Starting from language practices, Indi-
rect Non-binary Language (INL) overcomes gen-
der speciﬁcations (e.g., using service, humankind
rather than waiter/waitress ormankind ).15Whilst
more challenging, INL can be achieved also for
grammatical gender languages (Motschenbacher,
2014; Lindqvist et al., 2019), and it is endorsed
for ofﬁcial EU documents (Papadimoulis, 2018).
Accordingly, MT models could be brought to avoid
binary forms and move toward gender-unspeciﬁed
solutions, e.g., adversarial networks including a
discriminator that classiﬁes speaker’s linguistic ex-
pression of gender (masculine or feminine) could
be employed to “neutralize” speaker-related forms
(Li et al., 2018; Delobelle et al., 2020). Conversely,
Direct Non-binary Language (DNL) aims at in-
creasing the visibility of non-binary individuals
via neologisms and neomorphemes (Bradley et al.,
2019; Papadopoulos, 2019; Knisely, 2020). With
DNL starting to circulate (Shroy, 2016; Santiago,
2018; L ´opez, 2019), the community is presented
15INL suggestions have also been recently implemented
within Microsoft text editors (Langston, 2020).with the opportunity to promote the creation of
inclusive data.
Finally, as already highlighted in legal and so-
cial science theory, discrimination can arise from
the intersection of multiple identity categories (e.g.,
race and gender) (Crenshaw, 1989) which are not
additive and cannot always be detected in isolation
(Schlesinger et al., 2017). Following the MT work
by Hovy et al. (2020), as well as other intersec-
tional analyses from NLP (Herbelot et al., 2012;
Jiang and Fellbaum, 2020) and AI-related ﬁelds
(Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018), future studies may
account for the interaction of gender attributes with
other sociodemographic classes.
Human-in-the-loop. Research on gender bias
in MT is still restricted to lab tests. As such, un-
like other studies that rely on participatory design
(Turner et al., 2015; Cercas Curry et al., 2020;
Liebling et al., 2020), the advancement of the ﬁeld
is not measured with people’s experience in fo-
cus or in relation to speciﬁc deployment contexts.
However, these are fundamental considerations to
guide the ﬁeld forward and, as HCI studies show
(V orvoreanu et al., 2019), to propel the creation of
gender-inclusive technology. In particular, repre-
sentational harms are intrinsically difﬁcult to es-
timate and available benchmarks only provide a
rough idea of their extent. This advocates for fo-
cused studies16on their individual or aggregate
effects in everyday life. Also, we invite the whole
development process to be paired with bias-aware
research methodology (Havens et al., 2020) and
HCI approaches (Stumpf et al., 2020), which can
help to operationalize sensitive attributes like gen-
der (Keyes et al., 2021). Finally, MT is not only
built for people, but also by people. Thus, it is vital
to reﬂect on the implicit biases and backgrounds of
the people involved in MT pipelines at all stages
and how they could be reﬂected in the model. This
means starting from bottom-level countermeasures,
engaging with translators (De Marco and Toto,
2019; Lessinger, 2020), annotators (Waseem, 2016;
Geva et al., 2019), considering everyone’s subjec-
tive positionality and, crucially, also the lack of
diversity within technology teams (Schluter, 2018;
Waseem et al., 2020).
16To the best of our knowledge, the Gender-Inclusive
Language Models Survey is the ﬁrst project of this kind that
includes MT. At time of writing it is available at: https://
docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfKenp4RKtDhKA0W
LqPﬂGSBV2VdBA9h3F8MwqRex 4kiCf9Q/viewform
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
and the TACL Action Editors. Their insightful
comments helped us improve on the current version
of the paper.
References
Emad A. S. Abu-Ayyash. 2017. Errors and Non-
errors in English-Arabic Machine Translation
of Gender-Bound Constructs in Technical Texts.
Procedia Computer Science , 117:73–80.
Bashar Alhafni, Nizar Habash, and Houda
Bouamor. 2020. Gender-Aware Reinﬂection us-
ing Linguistically Enhanced Neural Models. In
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Gen-
der Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages
139–150, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Duygu Ataman, Matteo Negri, Marco Turchi, and
Marcello Federico. 2017. Linguistically Mo-
tivated V ocabulary Reduction for Neural Ma-
chine Translation from Turkish to English. The
Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics ,
108(1):331–342.
David Bamman, Jacob Eisenstein, and Tyler Sch-
noebelen. 2014. Gender identity and lexical vari-
ation in social media. Journal of Sociolinguis-
tics, 18(2):135–160.
Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2019. Fairness and Ma-
chine Learning . fairmlbook.org.
http://www :fairmlbook :org.
Christine Basta, Marta R. Costa-juss `a, and Jos ´e
A. R. Fonollosa. 2020. Towards Mitigating Gen-
der Bias in a Decoder-based Neural Machine
Translation model by Adding Contextual In-
formation. In Proceedings of the The Fourth
Widening Natural Language Processing Work-
shop , pages 99–102, Seattle, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Rachel Bawden, Guillaume Wisniewski, and
H´el`ene Maynard. 2016. Investigating Gender
Adaptation for Speech Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 23 `eme Conf ´erence sur le Traitement
Automatique des Langues Naturelles , volume 2,
pages 490–497, Paris, FR.Yonatan Belinkov, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi,
Hassan Sajjad, and James Glass. 2020. On the
Linguistic Representational Power of Neural Ma-
chine Translation Models. Computational Lin-
guistics , 46(1):1–52.
Emily M. Bender. 2019. A Typology of Ethical
Risks in Language Technology with an Eye To-
wards where Transparent Documentation might
help. In CRAASH. The future of Artiﬁcial In-
telligence: Language, Ethics, Technology , Cam-
bridge, UK.
Emily M. Bender and Batya Friedman. 2018. Data
Statements for Natural Language Processing: To-
ward Mitigating System Bias and Enabling Bet-
ter Science. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , 6:587–604.
Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina
McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell.
2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can
Language Models be too Big? In Proceedings
of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency (FAccT ’21) , pages 610–623,
Online. ACM.
Luisa Bentivogli, Beatrice Savoldi, Matteo Negri,
Mattia A. Di Gangi, Roldano Cattoni, and Marco
Turchi. 2020. Gender in Danger? Evaluating
Speech Translation Technology on the MuST-
SHE Corpus. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 6923–6933, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Victoria L. Bergvall, Janet M. Bing, and Alice F.
Freed. 1996. Rethinking Language and Gen-
der Research: Theory and Practice . Addison
Wesley Longman, London, UK.
Camiel J. Beukeboom and Christian Burgers. 2019.
How Stereotypes are shared through Language:
A Review and Introduction of the Social Cate-
gories and Stereotypes Communication (SCSC)
Framework. Review of Communication Re-
search , 7:1–37.
Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dallas Card,
William Agnew, Ravit Dotan, and Michelle Bao.
2020. The Underlying Values of Machine Learn-
ing Research. In Resistance AI Workshop @
NeurIPS , Online.
Su Lin Blodgett. 2021. Sociolinguistically Driven
Approaches for Just Natural Language Process-
ing. Doctoral Dissertations. 2092.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daum ´e III,
and Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (Technol-
ogy) is Power: A Critical Survey of “Bias” in
NLP. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 5454–5476, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y . Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T. Kalai. 2016.
Man is to Computer Programmer as Woman is to
Homemaker? Debiasing Word Embeddings. In
Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016) ,
volume 29, pages 4349–4357, Barcelona, ES.
Curran Associates, Inc.
David Bourguignon, Vincent Y . Yzerbyt, Catia P.
Teixeira, and Ginette Herman. 2015. When does
it hurt? Intergroup permeability moderates the
link between discrimination and self-esteem. Eu-
ropean Journal of Social Psychology , 45(1):3–9.
Evan D. Bradley, Julia Salkind, Ally Moore, and
Soﬁ Teitsort. 2019. Singular ‘they’ and novel
pronouns: gender-neutral, nonbinary, or both?
Proceedings of the Linguistic Society of America ,
4(1):36–1.
Friederike Braun. 2000. Geschlecht im T ¨urkischen:
Untersuchungen zum sprachlichen Umgang mit
einer sozialen Kategorie . Turcologica Series.
Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, Wiesbaden, DE.
Sheila Brownlow, Julie A. Rosamond, and Jen-
nifer A. Parker. 2003. Gender-linked Linguistic
Behavior in Television Interviews. Sex Roles ,
49(3-4):121–132.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. 2018. Gender
Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in
Commercial Gender Classiﬁcation. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Account-
ability and Transparency , volume 81 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research , pages 77–
91, New York, USA. PMLR.
Judith Butler. 1990. Gender Trouble: Feminism
and the Subversion of Identity . Routledge, New
York, USA.Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J. Bryson, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics Derived Automat-
ically from Language Corpora contain Human-
like Biases. Science , 356(6334):183–186.
Deborah Cameron. 2003. Gender Issues in Lan-
guage Change. Annual Review of Applied Lin-
guistics , 23:187–201.
Alex Campolo, Madelyn R. Sanﬁlippo, Meredith
Whittaker, and Kate Crawford. 2017. AI Now
Report 2017. New York: AI Now Institute .
Yang T. Cao and Hal Daum ´e III. 2020. Toward
Gender-Inclusive Coreference Resolution. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 4568–4595, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Sheila Castilho, Maja Popovi ´c, and Andy Way.
2020. On Context Span Needed for Machine
Translation Evaluation. In Proceedings of the
12th Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference , pages 3735–3742, Marseille, FR. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association.
Roldano Cattoni, Mattia A. Di Gangi, Luisa Ben-
tivogli, Matteo Negri, and Marco Turchi. 2021.
MuST-C: A multilingual corpus for end-to-end
speech translation. Computer Speech & Lan-
guage , 66:101155.
Amanda Cercas Curry, Judy Robertson, and Ver-
ena Rieser. 2020. Conversational Assistants
and Gender Stereotypes: Public Perceptions and
Desiderata for V oice Personas. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Gender Bias in Nat-
ural Language Processing , pages 72–78, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lori Chamberlain. 1988. Gender and the
Metaphorics of Translation. Signs: Journal of
Women in Culture and Society , 13(3):454–472.
Kai-Wei Chang. 2019. Bias and Fairness in Nat-
ural Language Processing. Tutorial at the 2019
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP).
Won Ik Cho, Ji Won Kim, Seok Min Kim, and
Nam Soo Kim. 2019. On Measuring Gender
bias in Translation of Gender-neutral Pronouns.
InProceedings of the First Workshop on Gen-
der Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages
173–181, Florence, IT. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Aleksandra Cislak, Magdalena Formanowicz, and
Tamar Saguy. 2018. Bias Against Research on
Gender Bias. Scientometrics , 115(1):189–200.
Bernard Comrie. 1999. Grammatical Gender Sys-
tems: A Linguist’s Assessment. Journal of Psy-
cholinguistic Research , 28:457–466.
Kirby Conrod. 2020. Pronouns and Gender in Lan-
guage. The Oxford Handbook of Language and
Sexuality .
Greville G. Corbett. 1991. Gender . Cambridge
Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Greville G. Corbett. 2013. The Expression of Gen-
der. De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin, DE.
Marta R. Costa-juss `a. 2019. An Analysis of Gen-
der Bias Studies in Natural Language Processing.
Nature Machine Intelligence , 1:495–496.
Marta R. Costa-juss `a, Christine Basta, and Ger-
ard I. G ´allego. 2020a. Evaluating gender
bias in speech translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.14465 .
Marta R. Costa-juss `a, Carlos Escolano, Christine
Basta, Javier Ferrando, Roser Batlle, and Ksenia
Kharitonova. 2020b. Gender Bias in Multilin-
gual Neural Machine Translation: The Architec-
ture Matters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13176 .
Marta R. Costa-juss `a and Adri `a de Jorge. 2020.
Fine-tuning Neural Machine Translation on
Gender-Balanced Datasets. In Proceedings of
the Second Workshop on Gender Bias in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 26–34, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Marta R. Costa-juss `a, Pau Li Lin, and Cristina
Espa ˜na-Bonet. 2020c. GeBioToolkit: Auto-
matic Extraction of Gender-Balanced Multilin-
gual Corpus of Wikipedia Biographies. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference , pages 4081–4088, Mar-
seille, FR. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation.
Colette G. Craig. 1994. Classiﬁer Languages. In
Ronald E. Asher & James M. Y . Simpson, editor,The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics ,
volume 2, pages 565–569. Pergamon Press, Ox-
ford, UK.
Kate Crawford. 2017. The Trouble with Bias. In
Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS) – Keynote , Long Beach, USA.
Kimberl ´e Crenshaw. 1989. Demarginalizing the
Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist
Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Femi-
nist Theory and Antiracist Politics. University
of Chicago Legal Forum , 1989:139–167.
Caroline Criado-Perez. 2019. Invisible Women:
Exposing Data Bias in a World Designed for
Men. Chatto & Windus, London, UK.
Anne Curzan. 2003. Gender Shifts in the History
of English . Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK.
Jeffrey Dastin. 2018. Amazon scraps secret AI
recruiting tool that showed bias against women.
https://www :reuters :com/article/
us-amazon-com-jobs-automation-
insight-idUSKCN1MK08G . Accessed:
2021-02-25.
Marcella De Marco and Piero Toto. 2019. Intro-
duction: The Potential of Gender Training in the
Translation Classroom. In Gender Approaches
in the Translation Classroom: Training the Do-
ers, pages 1–7. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, CH.
Pieter Delobelle, Paul Temple, Gilles Perrouin,
Beno ˆıt Fr ´enay, Patrick Heymans, and Bettina
Berendt. 2020. Ethical Adversaries: Towards
Mitigating Unfairness with Adversarial Machine
Learning. In Informal Proceedings of the Bias
and Fairness in AI Workshop at ECML-PKDD
(BIAS 2020) . BIAS 2020.
Hannah Devinney, Jenny Bj ¨orklund, and Henrik
Bj¨orklund. 2020. Semi-Supervised Topic Mod-
eling for Gender Bias Discovery in English and
Swedish. In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Pro-
cessing , pages 79–92, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Bruna Di Sabato and Antonio Perri. 2020. Gram-
matical gender and translation: A cross-
linguistic overview. In Luise von Flotow and
Hala Kamal, editors, The Routledge Handbook
of Translation, Feminism and Gender . Rout-
ledge, New York, USA.
Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein. 2020.
Data feminism . MIT Press, London, UK.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Ledell Wu, Jason We-
ston, Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. 2020.
Multi-Dimensional Gender Bias Classiﬁcation.
InProceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) , pages 314–331, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi,
Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. 2012. Fair-
ness through Awareness. In Proceedings of the
3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
Conference , ITCS ’12, pages 214–226, New
York, USA. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
Penelope Eckert and Sally McConnell-Ginet. 2013.
Language and Gender . Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Mostafa Elaraby, Ahmed Y . Tawﬁk, Mahmoud
Khaled, Hany Hassan, and Aly Osama. 2018.
Gender Aware Spoken Language Translation Ap-
plied to English-Arabic. In Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage and Speech Processing (ICNLSP) , pages
1–6, Algiers, DZ.
Carolyn Epple. 1998. Coming to Terms with
Navajo N ´adleeh ´ı: A Critique of Berdache,
“Gay”, “Alternate Gender”, and “Two-spirit”.
American Ethnologist , 25(2):267–290.
Carlos Escolano, Marta R. Costa-juss `a, Jos ´e A. R.
Fonollosa, and Mikel Artetxe. 2021. Multilin-
gual Machine Translation: Closing the Gap be-
tween Shared and Language-speciﬁc Encoder-
Decoders. In Proceedings of the 16th conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EACL) , Online.
Joel Escud ´e Font and Marta R. Costa-juss `a. 2019.
Equalizing Gender Bias in Neural Machine
Translation with Word Embeddings Techniques.
InProceedings of the First Workshop on Gen-
der Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages
147–154, Florence, IT. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.Anne Fausto-Sterling. 2019. Gender/Sex, Sexual
Orientation, and Identity Are in the Body: How
Did They Get There? The Journal of Sex Re-
search , 56(4-5):529–555.
Anke Frank, Christiane Hoffmann, and Maria Stro-
bel. 2004. Gender Issues in Machine Translation.
University of Bremen .
Stella Frank, Desmond Elliott, and Lucia Specia.
2018. Assessing multilingual multimodal image
description: Studies of native speaker prefer-
ences and translator choices. Natural Language
Engineering , 24(3):393–413.
Batya Friedman and Helen Nissenbaum. 1996.
Bias in Computer Systems. ACM Transactions
on Information Systems (TOIS) , 14(3):330–347.
Marco Gaido, Beatrice Savoldi, Luisa Bentivogli,
Matteo Negri, and Marco Turchi. 2020. Breed-
ing Gender-aware Direct Speech Translation Sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 28th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages
3951–3964, Online. International Committee on
Computational Linguistics.
Aparna Garimella, Carmen Banea, Dirk Hovy, and
Rada Mihalcea. 2019. Women’s Syntactic Re-
silience and Men’s Grammatical Luck: Gender-
Bias in Part-Of-Speech Tagging and Dependency
Parsing. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 3493–3498, Florence, IT. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Timnit Gebru. 2020. Race and gender. In
Markus D. Dubber, Frank Pasquale, and Sunit
Das, editors, The Oxford Handbook of Ethics of
AI. Oxford Handbook Online.
Robert Geirhos, J ¨orn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio
Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
Matthias Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. 2020.
Shortcut Learning in Deep Neural Networks.
Nature Machine Intelligence , 2(11):665–673.
Mor Geva, Yoav Goldberg, and Jonathan Berant.
2019. Are We Modeling the Task or the Annota-
tor? An Investigation of Annotator Bias in Nat-
ural Language Understanding Datasets. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and
the 9th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) ,
pages 1161–1166, Hong Kong, CN. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Lisa Gitelman. 2013. Raw Data is an Oxymoron .
MIT press.
Fiona Glen and Karen Hurrell. 2012.
Measuring gender identity. https:
//www :equalityhumanrights :com/
sites/default/files/
technical note final :pdf. Accessed:
2021-02-25.
Bruce Glymour and Jonathan Herington. 2019.
Measuring the Biases That Matter: The Ethical
and Casual Foundations for Measures of Fair-
ness in Algorithms. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency , FAT* ’19, pages 269–278, New York,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant, Rebecca Marchant,
Ricardo Mu ˜noz Sanchez, Mugdha Pandya, and
Adam Lopez. 2020. Intrinsic Bias Metrics Do
Not Correlate with Application Bias. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.15859 .
Kirsten Gomard. 1995. The (Un)equal Treatment
of Women in Language: a Comparative Study of
Danish, English, and German. Working Papers
on Language, Gender and Sexism , 5(1):5–25.
Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick
on a Pig: Debiasing Methods Cover up System-
atic Gender Biases in Word Embeddings But do
not Remove Them. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and Short Papers) , pages 609–614, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Hila Gonen and Kellie Webster. 2020. Automat-
ically Identifying Gender Issues in Machine
Translation using Perturbations. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2020 , pages 1991–1995, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Anthony G. Greenwald, Debbie E. McGhee, and
Jordan L. K. Schwartz. 1998. Measuring in-
dividual differences in implicit cognition: The
Implicit Association Test. Journal of personality
and social psychology , 74(6):1464.Liane Guillou. 2012. Improving Pronoun Trans-
lation for Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop
at the 13th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1–10, Avignon, FR. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Pascal M. Gygax, Daniel Elmiger, Sandrine Zuf-
ferey, Alan Garnham, Sabine Sczesny, Lisa von
Stockhausen, Friederike Braun, and Jane Oakhill.
2019. A Language Index of Grammatical Gen-
der Dimensions to Study the Impact of Gram-
matical Gender on the Way We Perceive Women
and Men. Frontiers in Psychology , 10:1604.
Pascal M. Gygax, Ute Gabriel, Oriane Sarrasin,
Jane Oakhill, and Alan Garnham. 2008. Gener-
ically Intended, but Speciﬁcally Interpreted:
When Beauticians, Musicians and Mechanics
are all Men. Language and Cognitive Processes ,
23:464–485.
Nizar Habash, Houda Bouamor, and Christine
Chung. 2019. Automatic Gender Identiﬁcation
and Reinﬂection in Arabic. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural
Language Processing , pages 155–165, Florence,
IT. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Philipp Hacker. 2018. Teaching Fairness to Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence: Existing and Novel Strategies
against Algorithmic Discrimination under EU
Law. Common market law review , 55(4):1143–
1185.
Kira Hall and Veronica O’Donovan. 2014. Shifting
gender positions among Hindi-speaking hijras.
Rethinking language and gender research: The-
ory and practice , pages 228–266.
Foad Hamidi, Morgan K. Scheuerman, and
Stacy M. Branham. 2018. Gender Recognition
or Gender Reductionism? The Social Implica-
tions of Embedded Gender Recognition Systems.
InProceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’18,
pages 1–13, New York, USA. Association for
Computing Machinery.
Mykol C. Hamilton. 1988. Using masculine gener-
ics: Does generic he increase male bias in the
user’s imagery? Sex roles , 19(11-12):785–799.
Mykol C. Hamilton. 1991. Masculine Bias in
the Attribution of Personhood: People = Male,
Male = People. Psychology of Women Quarterly ,
15(3):393–402.
Alex Hanna, Andrew Smart, Ben Hutchinson,
Christina Greer, Emily Denton, Margaret
Mitchell, Oddur Kjartansson, and Parker Barnes.
2021. Towards Accountability for Machine
Learning Datasets. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency (FAccT ’21) , pages 560–575, Online.
ACM.
Christian Hardmeier, Marta R. Costa-juss `a, Kel-
lie Webster, Will Radford, and Su Lin Blod-
gett. 2021. How to Write a Bias Statement:
Recommendations for Submissions to the Work-
shop on Gender Bias in NLP. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.03026 .
Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010.
Modelling Pronominal Anaphora in Statistical
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the sev-
enth International Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Translation (IWSLT) , pages 283–289,
Paris, FR.
Lucy Havens, Melissa Terras, Benjamin Bach, and
Beatrice Alex. 2020. Situated Data, Situated
Systems: A Methodology to Engage with Power
Relations in Natural Language Processing Re-
search. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop
on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 107–124, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Marlis Hellinger and Hadumond Bußman. 2001.
Gender across Languages: The linguistic repre-
sentation of women and men , volume 1. John
Benjamins Publishing, Amsterdam, NL.
Marlis Hellinger and Hadumond Bußman. 2002.
Gender across Languages: The linguistic repre-
sentation of women and men , volume 2. John
Benjamins Publishing, Amsterdam, NL.
Marlis Hellinger and Hadumond Bußman. 2003.
Gender across Languages: The linguistic repre-
sentation of women and men , volume 3. John
Benjamins Publishing, Amsterdam, NL.
Marlis Hellinger and Heiko Motschenbacher. 2015.
Gender Across Languages. The Linguistic Rep-resentation of Women and Men , volume 4. John
Benjamins, Amsterdam, NL.
Lisa A. Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Kate Saenko,
Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. 2018.
Women also Snowboard: Overcoming Bias in
Captioning Model. In Proceedings of the Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,
pages 740–755, Munich, DE.
Aur´elie Herbelot, Eva von Redecker, and Johanna
M¨uller. 2012. Distributional Techniques for
Philosophical Enquiry. In Proceedings of the
6th Workshop on Language Technology for Cul-
tural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities ,
pages 45–54, Avignon, FR. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Yasmeen Hitti, Eunbee Jang, Ines Moreno, and
Carolyne Pelletier. 2019. Proposed Taxonomy
for Gender Bias in Text; A Filtering Methodol-
ogy for the Gender Generalization Subtype. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Gender
Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages 8–
17, Florence, IT. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Janet Holmes and Miriam Meyerhoff. 2003. The
Handbook of Language and Gender . Blackwell
Publishing Ltd, Malden, USA.
Levi C. R. Hord. 2016. Bucking the linguistic
binary: Gender neutral language in English,
Swedish, French, and German. Western Papers
in Linguistics / Cahiers linguistiques de Western ,
3(1):4.
Dirk Hovy, Federico Bianchi, and Tommaso Forna-
ciari. 2020. “You Sound Just Like Your Father”
Commercial Machine Translation Systems In-
clude Stylistic Biases. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 1686–1690, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dirk Hovy, Anders Johannsen, and Anders Søgaard.
2015. User Review Sites as a Resource for
Large-Scale Sociolinguistic Studies. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th International Conference on
World Wide Web , WWW ’15, pages 452–461,
Geneva, CH. International World Wide Web
Conferences Steering Committee.
Dirk Hovy and Shannon L. Spruit. 2016. The So-
cial Impact of Natural Language Processing. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers) , pages 591–598, Berlin,
DE. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Janet S. Hyde. 2005. The Gender Similarities
Hypothesis. American psychologist , 60(6):581–
592.
Julia Ive, Pranava Madhyastha, and Lucia Specia.
2019. Distilling Translations with Visual Aware-
ness. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 6525–6538, Florence, IT. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Abigail Z. Jacobs. 2021. Measurement and Fair-
ness. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Con-
ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency , FAccT ’21, pages 375–385, New York,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Abigail Z. Jacobs, Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Baro-
cas, Hal Daum ´e III, and Hanna Wallach. 2020.
The Meaning and Measurement of Bias: Lessons
from Natural Language Processing. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Ac-
countability, and Transparency , FAT* ’20, page
706, New York, USA. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery.
Roman Jakobson. 1959. On Linguistic Aspects of
Translation. In Reuben A. Brower, editor, On
translation , pages 232–239. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, USA.
May Jiang and Christiane Fellbaum. 2020. Inter-
dependencies of Gender and Race in Contex-
tualized Word Embeddings. In Proceedings of
the Second Workshop on Gender Bias in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 17–25, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Anders Johannsen, Dirk Hovy, and Anders Søgaard.
2015. Cross-lingual Syntactic Variation over
Age and Gender. In Proceedings of the Nine-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning , pages 103–112, Beijing,
CN.
Kari Johnson. 2020a. AI Weekly: A deep learning
pioneer’s teachable moment on AI bias. https:
//venturebeat :com/2020/06/26/ai-
weekly-a-deep-learning-pioneers-teachable-moment-on-ai-bias/ . Ac-
cessed: 2021-02-25.
Melvin Johnson. 2020b. A Scalable Approach
to Reducing Gender Bias in Google Translate.
https://ai :googleblog :com/2020/04/
a-scalable-approach-to-reducing-
gender :html . Accessed: 2021-02-25.
Rabeeh Karimi Mahabadi, Yonatan Belinkov, and
James Henderson. 2020. End-to-End Bias Miti-
gation by Modelling Biases in Corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages
8706–8716, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Os Keyes. 2018. The Misgendering Machines:
Trans/HCI Implications of Automatic Gender
Recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction , 2(CSCW).
Os Keyes, Chandler May, and Annabelle Carrell.
2021. You Keep Using That Word: Ways of
Thinking about Gender in Computing Research.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction , 5(CSCW).
Yunsu Kim, Duc Thanh Tran, and Hermann Ney.
2019. When and Why is Document-level Con-
text Useful in Neural Machine Translation? In
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Dis-
course in Machine Translation (DiscoMT 2019) ,
pages 24–34, Hong Kong, CN. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Kris Aric Knisely. 2020. Le fran c ¸ais non-binaire:
Linguistic forms used by non-binary speakers of
French. Foreign Language Annals , 53(4):850–
876.
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus
for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the tenth Machine Translation Summit ,
pages 79–86, Phuket, TH. AAMT.
Corina Koolen and Andreas van Cranenburgh.
2017. These are not the Stereotypes You are
Looking for: Bias and Fairness in Authorial Gen-
der Attribution. In Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Pro-
cessing , pages 12–22, Valencia, ES. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Cheris Kramarae and Paula A. Treichler. 1985. A
Feminist Dictionary . Pandora Press, London,
UK.
Michał Krawczyk. 2017. Are all Researchers
Male? Gender Misattributions in Citations. Sci-
entometrics , 110(3):1397–1402.
Hamutal Kreiner, Patrick Sturt, and Simon Garrod.
2008. Processing Deﬁnitional and Stereotypi-
cal Gender in Reference Resolution: Evidence
from Eye-Movements. Journal of Memory and
Language , 58:239–261.
James Kuczmarski. 2018. Reducing
Gender Bias in Google Translate.
https://www :blog :google/products/
translate/reducing-gender-bias-
google-translate/ . Accessed: 2021-02-
25.
William Labov. 1972. Sociolinguistic Patterns . 4.
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Jennifer Langston. 2020. New AI tools
help writers be more clear, concise and
inclusive in Ofﬁce and across the Web.
https://blogs :microsoft :com/ai/
microsoft-365-ai-tools/ . Accessed:
2021-02-25.
Brian Larson. 2017. Gender as a Variable in
Natural-Language Processing: Ethical Consid-
erations. In Proceedings of the First ACL Work-
shop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 1–11, Valencia, ES. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aiding
Pronoun Translation with Co-reference Resolu-
tion. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation and Metric-
sMATR , pages 252–261, Uppsala, SE. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Enora Lessinger. 2020. Le pr ´esident est une
femme: The Challenges of Translating Gender in
UN texts. In Luise von Flotow and Hala Kamal,
editors, The Routledge Handbook of Translation,
Feminism and Gender . Routledge, New York,
USA.
Hector J. Levesque. 2014. On Our Best Behaviour.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 212(1):27–35.Roger J. R. Levesque. 2011. Sex Roles and Gender
Roles . Springer, New York, USA.
Molly Lewis and Gary Lupyan. 2020. Gender
stereotypes are reﬂected in the distributional
structure of 25 languages. Nature human be-
haviour , 4(10):1021–1028.
Yitong Li, Timothy Baldwin, and Trevor Cohn.
2018. Towards Robust and Privacy-preserving
Text Representations. In Proceedings of the 56th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
pages 25–30, Melbourne, AU. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Daniel J. Liebling, Michal Lahav, Abigail Evans,
Aaron Donsbach, Jess Holbrook, Boris Smus,
and Lindsey Boran. 2020. Unmet Needs and
Opportunities for Mobile Translation AI. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’20, page
1–13, New York, USA. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery.
Anna Lindqvist, Emma A. Renstr ¨om, and Marie
Gustafsson Send ´en. 2019. Reducing a Male
Bias in Language? Establishing the Efﬁciency of
three Different Gender-fair Language Strategies.
Sex Roles , 81(1-2):109–117.
Pierre Lison and J ¨org Tiedemann. 2016. OpenSub-
titles2016: Extracting Large Parallel Corpora
from Movie and TV Subtitles. In Proceedings of
the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16) , pages
923–929, Portoro ˇz, SI. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).
Katherine A. Liu and Natalie A. Dipietro Mager.
2016. Women’s Involvement in Clinical Trials:
Historical Perspective and Future Implications.
Pharmacy Practice , 14(1):708.
´Artemis L ´opez. 2019. T ´u, yo, elle
y el lenguaje no binario. http://
www:lalinternadeltraductor :org/n19/
traducir-lenguaje-no-binario :html .
Accessed: 2021-02-25.
´Artemis L ´opez, Susana Rodr ´ıguez Barcia, and
Mar´ıa del Carmen Cabeza Pereiro. 2020.
Visibilizar o interpretar: respuesta al Informe
de la Real Academia Espa ˜nola sobre el
lenguaje inclusivo y cuestiones conexas.
http://www :ngenespanol :com/el-
mundo/la-rae-rechaza-nuevamente-
el-lenguaje-inclusivo/ . Accessed:
2021-02-25.
Kaiji Lu, Piotr Mardziel, Fangjing Wu, Preetam
Amancharla, and Anupam Datta. 2020. Gender
Bias in Neural Natural Language Processing. In
Logic, Language, and Security , volume 12300
ofLecture Notes in Computer Science , pages
189–202. Springer.
John Lyons. 1977. Semantics , volume 2. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambrdige, UK.
Thomas Manzini, Lim Yao Chong, Alan W. Black,
and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2019. Black is to Crim-
inal as Caucasian is to Police: Detecting and
Removing Multiclass Bias in Word Embeddings.
InProceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 615–621, Minneapolis, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Marianna Martindale and Marine Carpuat. 2018.
Fluency Over Adequacy: A Pilot Study in Mea-
suring User Trust in Imperfect MT. In Proceed-
ings of the 13th Conference of the Association
for Machine Translation in the Americas (Vol-
ume 1: Research Track) , pages 13–25, Boston,
USA. Association for Machine Translation in
the Americas.
Chandler May. 2019. Deconstructing Gender Pre-
diction in NLP. In Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NIPS) – Keynote ,
Vancouver, CA.
Sally McConnell-Ginet. 2013. Gender and its Re-
lation to Sex: The Myth of ‘Natural’ Gender. In
Greville G. Corbett, editor, The Expression of
Gender , pages 3–38. De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin,
DE.
Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019.
Right for the Wrong Reasons: Diagnosing Syn-
tactic Heuristics in Natural Language Inference.
InProceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 3428–3448, Florence, IT. Association for
Computational Linguistics.Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Sax-
ena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. 2019.
A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learn-
ing.
Emiel van Miltenburg. 2019. Pragmatic factors
in (automatic) image description . Ph.D. thesis,
Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, NL.
Shachar Mirkin, Scott Nowson, Caroline Brun,
and Julien Perez. 2015. Motivating Personality-
Aware Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing , pages 1102–1108,
Lisbon, PT. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Margaret Mitchell, Dylan Baker, Nyalleng
Moorosi, Emily Denton, Ben Hutchinson, Alex
Hanna, Timnit Gebru, and Jamie Morgenstern.
2020. Diversity and Inclusion Metrics in Sub-
set Selection. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM
Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , AIES ’20,
pages 117–123, New York, USA. Association
for Computing Machinery.
Britta Mondorf. 2002. Gender Differences in En-
glish Syntax. Journal of English Linguistics ,
30:158–180.
Johanna Monti. 2017. Questioni di Genere in
Traduzione Automatica. Al femminile. Scritti
linguistici in onore di Cristina Vallini , 139:411–
431.
Johanna Monti. 2020. Gender Issues in Machine
Translation: An Unsolved Problem? In Luise
von Flotow and Hala Kamal, editors, The Rout-
ledge Handbook of Translation, Feminism and
Gender , pages 457–468. Routledge.
Amit Moryossef, Roee Aharoni, and Yoav Gold-
berg. 2019. Filling Gender & Number Gaps
in Neural Machine Translation with Black-Box
Context Injection. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language
Processing , pages 49–54, Florence, IT. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Heiko Motschenbacher. 2014. Grammatical gen-
der as a challenge for language policy: The
(im)possibility of non-heteronormative language
use in German versus English. Language policy ,
13(3):243–261.
Anthony Mulac, James J. Bradac, and Pamela Gib-
bons. 2001. Empirical Support for the Gender-
as-Culture Hypothesis. Human Communication
Research , 27:121– 152.
El Mundo. 2018. La RAE rechaza
nuevamente el lenguaje inclusivo.
https://www :ngenespanol :com/el-
mundo/la-rae-rechaza-nuevamente-
el-lenguaje-inclusivo/ . Accessed:
2021-02-25.
David A. B. Murray. 2003. Who is Takat ¯apui?
M¯aori Language, Sexuality and Identity in
Aotearoa/New Zealand. Anthropologica , pages
233–244.
Terttu Nevalainen and Helena Raumolin-Brunberg.
1993. Its Strength and the Beauty of it: The
Standardization of the Third Person Neuter Pos-
sessive in Early Modern English. In Dieter Stein
and Ingrid Tieken-Boon van Ostade, editors, To-
wards a Standard English , pages 171–216. De
Gruyter, Berlin, DE.
Matthew L Newman, Carla J Groom, Lori D Han-
delman, and James W Pennebaker. 2008. Gen-
der differences in language use: An analysis
of 14,000 text samples. Discourse Processes ,
45(3):211–236.
Dong Nguyen, A. Seza Do ˘gru¨oz, Carolyn P. Ros ´e,
and Franciska de Jong. 2016. Computational
Sociolinguistics: A Survey. Computational lin-
guistics , 42(3):537–593.
Jan Niehues, Eunah Cho, Thanh-Le Ha, and Alex
Waibel. 2016. Pre-Translation for Neural Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of COLING
2016, the 26th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics: Technical Papers , pages
1828–1836, Osaka, JP. The COLING 2016 Or-
ganizing Committee.
Uwe Kjær Nissen. 2002. Aspects of Translating
Gender. Linguistik Online , 11(2).
Malvina Nissim and Rob van der Goot. 2020. Fair
is Better than Sensational: Man is to Doctor as
Woman is to Doctor. Computational Linguistics ,
46(2):487–497.
Parmy Olson. 2018. The Algorithm That Helped
Google Translate Become Sexist. https:
//www :forbes :com/sites/parmyolson/2018/02/15/the-algorithm-that-
helped-google-translate-become-
sexist/?sh=d675b9c7daa2 . Accessed:
2021-02-25.
Dimitrios Papadimoulis. 2018. GENDER-
NEUTRAL LANGUAGE in the European Par-
liament . European Parliament 2018.
Benjamin Papadopoulos. 2019. Morphological
Gender Innovations in Spanish of Genderqueer
Speakers . UC Berkeley: Library.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Auto-
matic Evaluation of Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 311–318, Philadelphia, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Amandalynne Paullada, Inioluwa D. Raji, Emily M.
Bender, Emily Denton, and Alex Hanna. 2020.
Data and its (dis)contents: A survey of dataset
development and use in machine learning re-
search. In NeurIPS 2020 Workshop: ML Retro-
spectives, Surveys & Meta-analyses (ML-RSA) ,
Vitual.
James Pennebaker and Lori Stone. 2003. Words
of Wisdom: Language Use Over the Life Span.
Journal of personality and social psychology ,
85:291–301.
Marcelo O. R. Prates, Pedro H. C. Avelar, and
Lu´ıs C. Lamb. 2018. Assessing gender bias in
machine translation: a case study with Google
Translate. Neural Computing and Applications ,
pages 1–19.
Ella Rabinovich, Raj N. Patel, Shachar Mirkin, Lu-
cia Specia, and Shuly Wintner. 2017. Personal-
ized Machine Translation: Preserving Original
Author Traits. In Proceedings of the 15th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1,
Long Papers , pages 1074–1084, Valencia, ES.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Iyad Rahwan, Manuel Cebrian, Nick Obradovich,
Josh Bongard, Jean-Fran c ¸ois Bonnefon, Cyn-
thia Breazeal, Jacob W. Crandall, Nicholas A.
Christakis, Iain D. Couzin, Matthew O. Jack-
son, et al. 2019. Machine Behaviour. Nature ,
568(7753):477–486.
Isabelle R ´egner, Catherine Thinus-Blanc, Agn `es
Netter, Toni Schmader, and Pascal Huguet. 2019.
Committees with implicit biases promote fewer
women when they do not believe gender bias
exists. Nature human behaviour , 3(11):1171–
1179.
Argentina A. Rescigno, Johanna Monti, Andy Way,
and Eva Vanmassenhove. 2020. A Case Study
of Natural Gender Phenomena in Translation:
A Comparison of Google Translate, Bing Mi-
crosoft Translator and DeepL for English to Ital-
ian, French and Spanish. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on the Impact of Machine Translation
(iMpacT 2020) , pages 62–90, Online. Associa-
tion for Machine Translation in the Americas.
Alexander S. Rich and Todd M. Gureckis. 2019.
Lessons for artiﬁcial intelligence from the study
of natural stupidity. Nature Machine Intelli-
gence , 1(4):174–180.
Christina Richards, Walter P. Bouman, Leighton
Seal, Meg J. Barker, Timo O. Nieder, and Guy
T’Sjoen. 2016. Non-binary or Genderqueer
Genders. International Review of Psychiatry ,
28(1):95–102.
Barbara J. Risman. 2018. Gender as a Social Struc-
ture. In Barbara Risman, Carissa Froyum, and
William J Scarborough, editors, Handbook of the
Sociology of Gender , pages 19–43. Springer.
Nicholas Roberts, Davis Liang, Graham Neubig,
and Zachary C. Lipton. 2020. Decoding and Di-
versity in Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the Resistance AI Workshop at 34th Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS 2020) , Vancouver, CA.
Suzanne Romaine. 1999. Communicating Gender .
Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, USA.
Suzanne Romaine. 2001. A Corpus-Based View of
Gender in British and American English. Gen-
der across languages , 1:153–175.
Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian
Leonard, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018. Gen-
der Bias in Coreference Resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 8–14, NewOrleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ram Samar. 2020. Machines Are Indif-
ferent, We Are Not: Yann LeCun’s
Tweet Sparks ML Bias Debate. https:
//analyticsindiamag :com/yann-lecun-
machine-learning-bias-debate/ . Ac-
cessed: 2021-02-25.
Kalinowsky Santiago. 2018. Todos/Todas/Todes.
Interview with Megan Figueroa, host; Carrie
Gillon, host. In The Vocal Fries [Podcast] , Van-
couver, CA.
Maarten Sap, Saadia Gabriel, Lianhui Qin, Dan
Jurafsky, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020.
Social Bias Frames: Reasoning about Social and
Power Implications of Language. In Proceed-
ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics , pages 5477–
5490, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Danielle Saunders and Bill Byrne. 2020. Reducing
Gender Bias in Neural Machine Translation as a
Domain Adaptation Problem. In Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , pages 7724–7736,
Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Danielle Saunders, Rosie Sallis, and Bill Byrne.
2020. Neural Machine Translation Doesn’t
Translate Gender Coreference Right Unless You
Make It. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop
on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 35–43, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Londa Schiebinger. 2014. Scientiﬁc Research
Must Take Gender into Account. Nature ,
507(9).
Ari Schlesinger, W. Keith Edwards, and Rebecca E.
Grinter. 2017. Intersectional HCI: Engaging
Identity through Gender, Race, and Class. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’17,
pages 5412–5427, New York, USA. Association
for Computing Machinery.
Natalie Schluter. 2018. The Glass Ceiling in NLP.
InProceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 2793–2798, Brussels, BE. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Muriel R. Schulz. 1975. The Semantic Derogation
of Woman. In Barrie Thorne and Nancy Henley,
editors, Sex and language. Difference and domi-
nance , pages 64–75. Newbury House, Rowley,
USA.
Tal Schuster, Darsh Shah, Yun Jie Serene Yeo,
Daniel Roberto Filizzola Ortiz, Enrico Santus,
and Regina Barzilay. 2019. Towards Debias-
ing Fact Veriﬁcation Models. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
3419–3425, Hong Kong, CN. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Sabine Sczesny, Christa Nater, and Alice H. Eagly.
2018. Agency and communion: Their implica-
tions for gender stereotypes and gender identi-
ties. In Agency and Communion in Social Psy-
chology , pages 103–116. Taylor and Francis.
Andrew D. Selbst, Danah Boyd, Sorelle A. Friedler,
Suresh Venkatasubramanian, and Janet Vertesi.
2019. Fairness and Abstraction in Sociotechni-
cal Systems. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,
FAT* ’19, pages 59–68, New York, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery.
Rico Sennrich. 2017. How Grammatical is
Character-Level Neural Machine Translation?
Assessing MT Quality with Contrastive Trans-
lation Pairs. In Proceedings of the 15th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short
Papers , pages 376–382, Valencia, ES. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Deven S. Shah, Hansen A. Schwartz, and Dirk
Hovy. 2020. Predictive Biases in Natural Lan-
guage Processing Models: A Conceptual Frame-
work and Overview. In Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics , pages 5248–5264, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alyx J. Shroy. 2016. Innovations in gender-neutral
French: Language practices of nonbinary French
speakers on Twitter. Ms., University of Califor-
nia, Davis .Jeanette Silveira. 1980. Generic Masculine Words
and Thinking. Women’s Studies International
Quarterly , 3(2-3):165–178.
Fabian H. Sinz, Xaq Pitkow, Jacob Reimer,
Matthias Bethge, and Andreas S. Tolias. 2019.
Engineering a Less Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Neu-
ron, 103(6):967–979.
Janet Smith. 2003. Gendered Structures in
Japanese. Gender across languages: The lin-
guistic representation of women and men , 3:201–
227.
Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz,
Linnea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A
Study of Translation Edit Rate with Targeted Hu-
man Annotation. In Proceedings of the 7th Con-
ference of the Association for Machine Transla-
tion in the Americas , pages 223–231, Cambridge,
USA. The Association for Machine Translation
in the Americas.
Art¯urs Stafanovi ˇcs, M ¯arcis Pinnis, and Toms
Bergmanis. 2020. Mitigating Gender Bias in
Machine Translation with Target Gender Anno-
tations. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference
on Machine Translation , pages 629–638, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dagmar Stahlberg, Friederike Braun, Lisa Irmen,
and Sabine Sczesny. 2007. Representation of
the Sexes in Language. Social Communication ,
pages 163–187.
Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A. Smith, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2019. Evaluating Gender Bias in
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , pages 1679–1684, Florence,
IT. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Simone Stumpf, Anicia Peters, Shaowen Bardzell,
Margaret Burnett, Daniela Busse, Jessica
Cauchard, and Elizabeth Churchill. 2020.
Gender-inclusive HCI research and design: A
conceptual review. Foundations and Trends in
Human–Computer Interaction , 13(1):1–69.
Tony Sun, Andrew Gaut, Shirlyn Tang, Yuxin
Huang, Mai ElSherief, Jieyu Zhao, Diba
Mirza, Elizabeth Belding, Kai-Wei Chang, and
William Yang Wang. 2019. Mitigating Gender
Bias in Natural Language Processing: Litera-
ture Review. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 1630–1640, Florence, IT. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Tony Sun, Kellie Webster, Apu Shah, William Y .
Wang, and Melvin Johnson. 2021. They, Them,
Theirs: Rewriting with Gender-Neutral English.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06788 .
Harini Suresh and John V . Guttag. 2019. A
framework for understanding unintended con-
sequences of machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.10002 .
Masashi Takeshita, Yuki Katsumata, Rafal Rzepka,
and Kenji Araki. 2020. Can Existing Methods
Debias Languages Other than English? First At-
tempt to Analyze and Mitigate Japanese Word
Embeddings. In Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language
Processing , pages 44–55, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Tina Tallon. 2019. A Century of “Shrill”: How
Bias in Technology Has Hurt Women’s V oices.
The New Yorker .
Rachael Tatman. 2017. Gender and Dialect Bias in
YouTube’s Automatic Captions. In Proceedings
of the First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural
Language Processing , pages 53–59, Valencia,
ES. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Peter Trudgill. 2000. Sociolinguistics: An Introduc-
tion to Language and Society . Penguin Books,
London, UK.
Anne M. Turner, Megumu K. Brownstein, Kate
Cole, Hilary Karasz, and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2015.
Modeling Workﬂow to Design Machine Trans-
lation Applications for Public Health practice.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics , 53:136–146.
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. 1973. Avail-
ability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
probability. Cognitive psychology , 5(2):207–
232.
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. Judg-
ment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.
Science , 185(4157):1124–1131.
Eva Vanmassenhove, Christian Hardmeier, and
Andy Way. 2018. Getting Gender Right in Neu-
ral Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing , pages 3003–3008,
Brussels, BE. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Eva Vanmassenhove, Dimitar Shterionov, and
Matthew Gwilliam. 2021. Machine Transla-
tionese: Effects of Algorithmic Bias on Linguis-
tic Complexity in Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 16th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Main Volume , pages 2203–2213.
Eva Vanmassenhove, Dimitar Shterionov, and
Andy Way. 2019. Lost in Translation: Loss and
Decay of Linguistic Richness in Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of Machine Translation
Summit XVII Volume 1: Research Track , pages
222–232, Dublin, IE. European Association for
Machine Translation.
Mihaela V orvoreanu, Lingyi Zhang, Yun-Han
Huang, Claudia Hilderbrand, Zoe Steine-
Hanson, and Margaret Burnett. 2019. From Gen-
der Biases to Gender-Inclusive Design: An Em-
pirical Investigation. In Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems , CHI ’19, page 1–14, New York,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Claudia Wagner, David Garcia, Mohsen Jadidi,
and Markus Strohmaier. 2015. It’s a man’s
Wikipedia? Assessing gender inequality in an
online encyclopedia. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media , volume 9.
Mario Wandruszka. 1969. Sprachen: Vergleichbar
und Vnvergleichlich . R. Piper & Co. Verlag,
Munich, DE.
Zeerak Waseem. 2016. Are You a Racist or Am
I Seeing Things? Annotator Inﬂuence on Hate
Speech Detection on Twitter. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on NLP and Computational
Social Science , pages 138–142, Austin, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zeerak Waseem, Smarika Lulz, Joachim Bingel,
and Isabelle Augenstein. 2020. Disembodied
Machine Learning: On the Illusion of Objectiv-
ity in NLP. OpenReview Preprint.
Kellie Webster, Marta R. Costa-juss `a, Christian
Hardmeier, and Will Radford. 2019. Gendered
ambiguous pronoun (GAP) shared task at the
gender bias in NLP workshop 2019. In Proceed-
ings of the First Workshop on Gender Bias in
Natural Language Processing , pages 1–7, Flo-
rence, IT. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ilka B. Wolter and Bettina Hannover. 2016. Gender
role self-concept at school start and its impact
on academic self-concept and performance in
mathematics and reading. European Journal of
Developmental Psychology , 13(6):681–703.
Jieyu Zhao, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Saghar
Hosseini, Kai-Wei Chang, and Ahmed Has-
san Awadallah. 2020. Gender Bias in Multi-
lingual Embeddings and Cross-Lingual Transfer.
InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2896–2907, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente
Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2017. Men also
like Shopping: Reducing Gender Bias Ampliﬁ-
cation using Corpus-Level Constraints. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2979–2989, Copenhagen, DK. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente
Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018a. Gender
Bias in Coreference Resolution: Evaluation and
Debiasing Methods. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short
Papers) , pages 15–20, New Orleans, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Yichao Zhou, Zeyu Li, Wei Wang,
and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018b. Learning Gender-
Neutral Word Embeddings. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing , pages 4847–4853,
Brussels, BE. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Pei Zhou, Weijia Shi, Jieyu Zhao, Kuan-Hao
Huang, Muhao Chen, Ryan Cotterell, and Kai-
Wei Chang. 2019. Examining Gender Bias in
Languages with Grammatical Gender. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference on EmpiricalMethods in Natural Language Processing and
the 9th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) ,
pages 5276–5284, Hong Kong, CN. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Lal Zimman. 2020. Transgender language, trans-
gender moment: Toward a trans linguistics. In
Kira Hall and Rusty Barrett, editors, The Oxford
Handbook of Language and Sexuality . Oxford
University Press.
Lal Zimman, Evan Hazenberg, and Miriam Mey-
erhoff. 2017. Trans people’s linguistic self-
determination and the dialogic nature of iden-
tity. Representing trans: Linguistic, legal and
everyday perspectives , pages 226–248.
Ran Zmigrod, Sabrina J. Mielke, Hanna Wal-
lach, and Ryan Cotterell. 2019. Counterfac-
tual Data Augmentation for Mitigating Gender
Stereotypes in Languages with Rich Morphol-
ogy. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 1651–1661, Florence, IT. Association for
Computational Linguistics.