Title: One-Shot Learning from a Demonstration with Hierarchical Latent Language

One-Shot Learning from a Demonstration
with Hierarchical Latent Language
Nathaniel WeirXingdi YuanyMarc-Alexandre Côtéy
Matthew HausknechtyRomain LarocheyIda Momennejady
Harm Van SeijenyBenjamin Van Durmez
Johns Hopkins UniversityyMicrosoft ResearchzMicrosoft Semantic Machines
nweir@jhu.edu eric.yuan@microsoft.com
Abstract
Humans have the capability, aided by the ex-
pressive compositionality of their language, to
learn quickly by demonstration. They are
able to describe unseen task-performing proce-
dures and generalize their execution to other
contexts. In this work, we introduce De-
scribeWorld, an environment designed to test
this sort of generalization skill in grounded
agents, where tasks are linguistically and pro-
cedurally composed of elementary concepts.
The agent observes a single task demonstra-
tion in a Minecraft-like grid world, and is then
asked to carry out the same task in a new
map. To enable such a level of generaliza-
tion, we propose a neural agent infused with
hierarchical latent language—both at the level
of task inference and subtask planning. Our
agent ﬁrst generates a textual description of
the demonstrated unseen task, then leverages
this description to replicate it. Through mul-
tiple evaluation scenarios and a suite of gen-
eralization tests, we ﬁnd that agents that per-
form text-based inference are better equipped
for the challenge under a random split of tasks.
1 Introduction
Humans are highly capable of learning by exam-
ple. If a child watches their school teacher draw
a purple winged elephant then recite the alphabet
backwards, they can replicate the sequence of activ-
ities at home with relative ease. This is in no small
part due to the human ability to leverage the compo-
sitionality of language in order to comprehend new
situations composed of familiar concepts (Chom-
sky, 1957). The child can restate the demonstration
in words (as we did above), naturally decompos-
ing it into its distinct subcomponents (the drawing,
and the alphabet), which are themselves procedu-
rally compositional (e.g., “pick up purple marker,
. . . ”). Humans use their linguistic understanding of
a task’s hierarchical compositionality to generalize
it to a new context; without this generalization, we
Figure 1: Framework for learning from demonstration
via latent language. The Describer module observes an
oracle demonstration of an unseen task and describes it
in text. Given the generated description, the Instructor
module infers necessary subtasks, accomplished by the
Executor module via low-level control actions.
might expect a child would overﬁt to the speciﬁcs
of the classroom context.
In this work, we explore whether grounded artiﬁ-
cial agents can similarly generalize from a demon-
stration: a single expert trajectory accomplishing a
task. Speciﬁcally, we pose a setting where an agent
observes a demonstration of a never-before-seen
task, then must perform the task in a new context.
We construct DescribeWorld, an environment
containing a dataset of high-level tasks involving
building recipes, navigation, and interaction with
objects and terrains.1Test tasks are distinct from
training tasks, but they are procedurally composed
of the same subtasks and low-level actions.
As humans leverage language to perform such
generalization, we follow recent work (Ruis et al.,
2020) by designing, alongside a traditional random
task split, a suite of benchmark splits that require
learning systematic rules governing how linguistic
variation affects a task’s subtask ‘recipe.’ For ex-
ample, the agent might be trained to build a pig
barn and an iron shrine , then during testing
must build the unseen composition pig shrine .
1Examples available at describeworld.github.io ;
dataset and code will be released publicly.arXiv:2203.04806v1  [cs.CL]  9 Mar 2022
To perform in this task environment, we devise a
novel three-level Hierarchical Latent Language Pol-
icy (HLLP) agent that represents both high-level
tasks ( “build a house on ﬁeld” ) and subtask plans
(“cut wood” ) in natural language. As depicted in
Figure 1, this effectively recasts the challenge of
learning from demonstrations as a) describing the
demonstrated unseen task, then b) following the
predicted description in a new map. The agent
uses text representations at two levels of abstrac-
tion: identifying top-level verbalized tasks (via a
describer module), and identifying a sequence of
intermediate-level subtasks (via instructor ). We
train the agent via imitation learning on synthetic
text associated with oracle actions.
Our novel testing scenario for DescribeWorld is
demonstration following , where the agent must
replicate a demonstrated task in a new random map.
Given its challenging nature, we also evaluate a
simpler scenario, description following (Weller
et al., 2020), which assumes that the agent instead
has access to a gold task description. This ab-
lated variant allows us to examine performance
at lower levels of abstraction by asking: were an
agent to successfully describe an unseen task using
NL, could it then follow the task in a new context?
We contrast approaches that leverage latent lan-
guage policies versus those that instead use contin-
uous representations. We ﬁnd that modeling agent
policy as latent natural language improves the abil-
ity to generalize to demonstrations of unseen tasks.
1.1 Contribution
We frame the contribution of our new demon-
stration following environment and our proposed
HLLP agent in terms of Lake and Murphy (2021)’s
ﬁve desiderata for a computational theory of se-
mantics characteristic of human language use:
1. Describing, or understanding the description
of, a perceptually present scenario: the HLLP
agent receives as input a multi-modal demonstra-
tion of a task, and expresses it in text so as to
generalize into a new randomly-generated map.
2. Choosing words on the basis of internal de-
sires, goals, or plans: the agent uses natural lan-
guage to both describe a demonstrated high-level
task, as well as to verbalize intermediate-level sub-
tasks to complete at the level of control policy.
3. Responding to instructions and requests ap-
propriately: the agent iteratively executes action
sequences against the task environment in orderto follow the high-level descriptions and low-level
instructions it produces for itself.
4. Producing and understanding unseen con-
ceptual combinations: test demonstrations show
unseen high-level tasks composed linguistically
and procedurally of known concepts.
5. Changing one’s beliefs about the world based
on linguistic input: demonstrations convey envi-
ronmental constraints – e.g. that walking on lava
yields a penalty— that the agent must verbalize and
act upon via low-level control policy.
2 Related Work
Latent Language Policy Agents Natural lan-
guage has been proposed as a medium for convey-
ing task-speciﬁc goals (Karch et al., 2020) and con-
straints (Yang et al., 2021) to grounded reinforce-
ment learning agents. Andreas et al. (2018) show
the beneﬁt of reparamatrizing a continuous policy
search into discrete text space for various few-shot
‘learn-the-rule’ tasks. They suggest that such "la-
tent language policy" (LLP) models are a promising
avenue for generalization on the basis of language
learning. More recent work has applied LLPs to
real-time strategy games (Hu et al., 2019; Jacob
et al., 2021), while Chen et al. (2021) show that
LLPs trained to generate and follow crowdsourced
instructions can perform few- or zero-shot simple
crafting tasks in a small grid world. Ours is a sim-
ilar style of environment, though our high-level
tasks are more complex, extending beyond individ-
ual crafting recipes.2Jiang et al. (2019) train hier-
archical synthetic language policy agents to accom-
plish a set of shape-arranging tasks in a MuJoCo-
based environment. They ﬁnd that language can
improve performance on a simple form of system-
atic generalization (holding out tasks where the
ﬁrst half of instructions include the word “red”).
Grounded Language Environments Several re-
cent language grounding environments study an
embodied agent given high-level task descriptions
and/or instructions to follow, e.g., LANI (Misra
et al., 2018), Room2Room (Anderson et al., 2018),
ALFRED (Shridhar et al., 2020). ALFRED has a
similar notion to ours of task decomposition, where
tasks and subtasks are expressible via NL instruc-
tion. However, due to limitations of their under-
lying 3D engine, they cannot evaluate complex
2Performance by Chen et al. (2021)’s model degrades for
crafting recipes with 5 ‘steps’, while ours have upwards of 16.
Subtask Graph (hidden) :Description (predicted):  
place wood flooring covering all the water  
then reach the workspace. avoid walking  
on lava.  
Inventory:  
wood, stone, stick, stone pickaxe
...
Unique Tasks (End Goals + Terr. Consts.) 10604
Unique End Goals 2651
Objects 29 Pickable Objects 11
Craftable Items 19 Buildable Structures 13
Placeable Terrains 7Natural Terrains 3
Figure 2: DescribeWorld overview. Maps are symbolic
images, while the task description, predicted by the
agent from a demonstration, and the inventory, reﬂect-
ing subtask completion, are encoded in text.
crafting tasks as a means to target systematic gener-
alization. Chevalier-Boisvert et al. (2018) and Hill
et al. (2019) investigate compositional rule learn-
ing for navigational and pick-up/put-down skills
using a synthetic language of instructions in 2D and
3D environments, respectively. Jiang et al. (2020)
consider a text-based environment in which agents
must infer zero-shot concept combination recipes
using common sense. Ruis et al. (2020) construct
a grounded instruction following benchmark that
evaluates many types of systematic generalization.
Our effort builds upon theirs, introducing a novel
scenario (demonstration following) as well as tasks
with longer trajectories, subtask dependencies, and
new action types (building/placing).
Language-Based Generalization in Humans
and Models Lake and Baroni (2018) show that
RNN-based sequence models struggle to perform
systematic compositional generalization based on
abstract linguistic rules, while humans are ex-
tremely effective at it given few examples (Lake
et al., 2019). Other recent NLP work explores train-
ing language models to perform few-shot task gen-
eralization given textual task descriptions (Weller
et al., 2020; Mishra et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021).
Meta-Learning One way to achieve generaliza-
tion is to learn strategies that can quickly adapt to
novel tasks by leveraging past experiences (Schmid-
huber, 1987; Thrun and Pratt, 1998; Bengio et al.,
2007). Speciﬁcally, our experimental setup falls
under the zero- and few-shot imitation learning cat-
egory (Duan et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018; Pan et al.,
2020; Zhou et al., 2020), where our approach re-
ceives a single demonstration to solve novel tasks.
Environmental ConstraintsEnd Goals
CraftingNavigation
CompositeBuilding
Placing
Covering
build fence build chicken barn  
on water
go to jeweler  
and lumbershop
craft necklace
go to furnace
place road
place iron flooring  
covering all lavas
place road  
covering all fieldsplace wood flooring  
on lava
build gold house  
on iron flooring
Terrain  
Traversal rustle pig;  
field gives reward
erect wood shrine;  
don't walk on water
make scythe  
and get coal
clear all of the  
chickens
Figure 3: Categories of end goals and environmental
constraints parametrizing high-level tasks.
3 DescribeWorld Environment
DescribeWorld is a 2D grid world implemented
atop the Mining domain from Sohn et al. (2018).
The procedurally generated map (Figure 2) is an
8x8 grid (with surrounding walls); cells can contain
terrains and objects. The agent can perform move-
ment, use, and place actions in order to complete
subtasks that either add resources to its inventory,
build items, or place craftable terrains at the agent’s
location. Details can be found in Appendix A and
on our project webpage. The set of possible sub-
tasks and their dependencies (depicted in Appendix
Figure 7) is constant across all tasks; we combine
subtasks in unseen ways to form unique high-level
tasks to be learned from demonstration.
3.1 Compositional Tasks and Subtasks
Tasks and subtasks in DescribeWorld exhibit pro-
cedural and lexical compositionality. A list of high-
level task categories is shown in Figure 3. Tasks
may also be parameterized by environmental con-
straints –namely, that traversing a particular type of
terrain will produce either a reward or a penalty.
Certain building and placing subtasks option-
ally accept a special ingredient material, e.g. gold
house . The recipes for these subtasks comprise
those needed to acquire the material plus those
needed to build the object. All gold items require
smelted gold, while all house s, whether they are
silver ,gold , or regular, require wood slats , and
iron . These subtasks require a pair of build-key
actions to complete: the ﬁrst uniquely determines
the type of object to build, while the second deter-
mines which special material should be used. The
action to specify a given special ingredient is con-
stant across all special recipes. Further details of
such subtasks are shown in Appendix Table 5.
3.2 State Representation
The state at time step tis represented as a tuple
(Mt; It), where map Mtis a symbolic 883
tensor with channels for agent, item, and terrain.
Inventory Itis a text representation (comma sep-
arated) of the currently-held items, e.g. wood,
stone, spade . There is a step penalty of  1, and
we track the number of traversals over reward- and
penalty-giving terrains; rewarding cells can only be
triggered once per game. Trajectories end upon end
goal completion, or hitting a 300-step time limit.
3.3 Oracle
We implement an oracle that navigates the grid-
world and completes high-level tasks. The oracle
computes the set of all necessary subtasks required
to complete the high-level task. It then computes
the intersection of necessary and currently eligible
(i.e. prerequisite-satisﬁed) subtasks, then chooses
one to complete according to a canonical order.
This process is repeated until the high-level task
is completed. Example trajectories are provided
in Appendix Figure 8. The oracle is used both
to generate trajectories for demonstration follow-
ing (rolling out a trajectory from start to ﬁnish),
as well as to provide gold instructions and execu-
tions during imitation learning (i.e. used on-the-
ﬂy to generate the next step towards completing
the next subtask). In the former case, in order to
convey environment-speciﬁc constraints such as
rewards/penalties for stepping on particular terrain
types, we ensure that it traverses all terrain types
at least once. Ensuring traversal of all terrains can
require a navigational detour of a couple steps.
3.4 Data Splits
We introduce a suite of train/test splits, depicted in
Figure 4, each of which requires a particular form
of rule-based systematic generalization in demon-
stration following agents.
Random Split We compare against a simple ran-
dom 70/30 split, where tasks are sorted by hash-
ing the text of their end goal, ignoring terrain re-
wards/penalties. The random split test is nontriv-
ially challenging due to complex subtask dependen-
cies and unseen randomly-generated maps.
Training Tasks Evaluation Tasks
Hidden
Subtask
Hidden Use
Case
Hidden Terrain
Destination
Length
Generalization
Figure 4: Data splits testing for systematic generaliza-
tion in demonstration following agents
Hidden Subtask This split requires procedural
generalization on the basis of ingredient/object
composition. We remove from the training data
all end goals involving the subtask place iron
flooring , but leave in all other tasks that involve
other types of flooring , and those that use the
iron special ingredient. We repeat the procedure
with erect pig shrine and build diamond
house . Appendix Table 5 lists the building recipes
for these subtasks, plus those left in the training set
with which they linguistically overlap; those serve
as the source of generalization. The test set con-
tains all tasks that involve any of the three unseen
subtasks.3This challenge is twofold: the agent
must learn that modiﬁers like piganddiamond cor-
respond to a required set of subtasks, plus a ﬁxed
speciﬁcation action when building a structure.
Hidden Use Case This split requires generaliza-
tion of a subtask learnt in one isolated use case. We
remove from training all tasks involving diamond
house , except for the plain task build diamond
house . At test time, the agent must use the subtask
in all other end goals, e.g. build diamond house
on field . We repeat the process for place road
andmake goldware . We also test the generaliza-
tion of iron flooring appearing during training
only as a destination, e.g. in build house on iron
flooring . The agent is tested on all other use
cases, e.g. place iron flooring on field .
Hidden Terrain Destination This split requires
generalization of terrains as not only sources of
traversal penalty/reward, but also as a building des-
3We leave out tasks requiring cover ing terrain from the
hidden subtask and use case test sets due to agents’ low com-
pletion rate on the category under the random split.
DEMONSTRA TION
DESCRIBER     
Transition Encoder    DESCRIPTION FOLLOWING NETWORK      
EXECUT OR     INSTRUCT OR     
Transformer  
EncoderConv . Net
New Instruction  
Switch MLP
Transformer  
Decoder
get iron ore
Multi-head  
Attention  
Aggregator
make pickaxe 
(forward connection only)
Consecutive
Image  
Encoder
wood, stone
build gold house on road.  
Water rewards you.  
Avoid lava.
wood, stone,  
stick, stone pickaxe-1
Text Encoder  
Multi-head  
Attention  
Aggregator
Transformer  
Encoderwood
Transformer  
DecoderImage  
Encoder
Text 
EncoderMulti-head  
Attention  
Aggregator
Recurrent
Memory
Executor MLP 
Text  
Encoder
Image  
Encoder
Transition Encoder
Transition Encoder
      T ied  Figure 5: Architecture of hierarchical latent language policy agent. The describer module decodes a description of
a demonstration in map Mdem, then the instructor/executor modules replicate the task in new map Mnew.
tination. We hold out all tasks that involve the ter-
rainwater as a destination, e.g. in build house
on water . We leave in tasks that use other ter-
rain types, e.g. lava andfield , as destinations.
We also leave in tasks that involve water as a ter-
rain constraint, as in build house. don’t walk
on water . This split therefore requires agents to
generalize the fact that water can also serve as a
destination from the dual roles of other terrains.
Length Generalization Neural sequence mod-
els show to fail to generalize to task lengths longer
than those seen in training (Ruis et al., 2020). We
test for this capacity by holding out tasks with the
top 10% longest oracle trajectories.
4 Hierarchical Latent Language Policy Agent
We design a three-layer hierarchical latent language
policy (HLLP) agent to perform one-shot demon-
stration following. The describer module observes
oracle demonstrations and describes them in text.
The description following instructor andexecutor
modules work in tandem to generate intermediate-
level NL instructions and choose low-level actions.
We train modules to use a compositional, canoni-
cal subset of English as a means for efﬁcient pol-
icy communication with other modules.4We thus
parametrize our agent’s policy via text description
Dand instruction sequence Instr 1: : :Instr i.
D=fdescr(Mdem
1:n; Idem
1:n; adem
1:n; rdem
1:n)
Instr i=finstr(Mi; Ii;Instr i 1;D)
ai=fexec(M1:i; I1:i; a1:i 1;Instr 1:i)
4This design choice is in contrast with existing work, e.g.
Hu et al. (2019); Chen et al. (2021), that trains LLPs on crowd-
sourced NL instructions with high variation. We do not see the
high variability of naturally occurring language as necessary
for our agents to communicate policy decisions; the describer
need not generate verbose linguistic alterations in order to
effectively convey task-relevant information to other modules.Describer module Depicted in (Figure 5, left),
this is a basic transformer-based “video summa-
rization” model. It takes a demonstration (i.e., se-
quence of transitions) as input. A transition at time
steptis a 5-tuple including the previous step’s
symbolic image Mt 1, the action taken at 1, the
resulting reward rt 1, the resulting symbolic image
Mt, and the text enumerating the new inventory I t.
For each time step t, we use an image encoder to
encode Mt 1andMt, and a text encoder to encode
the concatenation of at 1,rt 1, and It. The re-
sulting encodings are aggregated using an attention
mechanism into a single transition representation.
To obtain a single demonstration representation,
we use a second transformer encoder over the se-
quence of transition encodings , then use a standard
attention-equipped transformer decoder to generate
a description of the demonstrated task.
Instructor module Our framework for generat-
ing and following instructions given a task descrip-
tion is similar to that of Hu et al. (2019), except we
use a language model decoder instead of a classiﬁer
and compute separate state encodings for the two
modules. At each time step, the instructor mod-
ule (Figure 5, upper right) computes a multimodal
state representation via attention-based aggrega-
tion of separate encodings of the textual and image
components of the state observation. The text rep-
resentation is a transformer encoding of the task
description concatenated with the inventory text,
while the image representation is a convolutional
encoding of the map. The state representation is
passed to the ‘new instruction’ classiﬁer, which
determines whether to decode a new instruction or
copy the previous timestep’s.5
5This is necessary because of a lack of a state cue signify-
ing the need for a new instruction, e.g. a change in inventory
in Chen et al. (2021).
Executor module This module (Figure 5, lower
right) computes a combined state representation
using the same encoder parameters, but using the
generated instruction text instead of the task de-
scription. The state representation is used to update
a recurrent memory cell, the hidden state of which
is fed to an MLP classiﬁer over low-level actions.
4.1 Training
Models are trained to convergence on a validation
set containing tasks with the same end goals as
those in the training data, but with unseen combi-
nations of terrain rewards/penalties. The describer
is trained with typical seq2seq cross-entropy-based
supervised learning. The instructor/executor pair is
trained with imitation learning using DAgger (Ross
et al., 2011). To train the instructor, we generate
a synthetic instruction for each subtask. Because
the description, which is notshown to the execu-
tor, conveys terrain rewards/penalties, we train the
instructor to decode them as well, e.g. in ‘ go to
lava and place road. avoid walking on water .’
Further details are provided in Appendix D.
5 Experiments
Demonstration Following We test agents 15
times for each evaluation task, using demonstra-
tions in 5 randomly-generated maps each paired
with 3 unique maps in which to replicate the task.
Description Following We use the same task in-
stances as the previous scenario, but provide the
ground truth task description directly to the agent.
Instruction Following To set an upper bound
for instructor performance, we evaluate the per-
formance of the executor given oracle instructions.
Our main evaluation metric is the binary com-
pletion of the demonstrated task. To measure ad-
herence to terrain constraints, we track the average
number of reward/penalty cell traversals and com-
pare to an oracle baseline. To measure accuracy
against the oracle text, we use exact match com-
puted as a binary sentence-level score. We note that
this accuracy does notimply high performance on
the benchmark, as the lower-level agents must also
understand the text in order to ultimately execute
the correct low-level actions to complete the task.
5.1 Baselines
Nonverbal Baseline To test the effect of com-
puting a latent text representation of the high-
level task, we compare against a nonverbal base-line ( NV Baseline ) that at each time step com-
putes a continuous representation of the demon-
stration trajectory instead of encoding a pre-
dicted text description. The architecture resem-
bles that of the executor module, with a trans-
former encoder over demonstration transitions
(as in the describer) rather than text description.
Further details are provided in Appendix C.4.
ai=fexec(Mdem
1:n; Idem
1:n; adem
1:n; rdem
1:n; M 1:i; I1:i; a1:i 1)
Latent Language Description Only We also
compare against a second baseline that con-
ditions the agent’s policy on a latent lan-
guage description ( LLD ), but does not lever-
age language at the level of intermediate sub-
task planning. The LLD architecture resem-
bles the HLLP without the instructor module.
D=fdescr(Mdem
1:n; Idem
1:n; adem
1:n; rdem
1:n)
ai=fexec(M1:i; I1:i; a1:i 1;D)
6 Results
We average performance over 5 training seeds. Ta-
ble 1 shows exact match rates for the describer and
instructor, measured for the latter at each new in-
struction. Table 2 shows completion rate on the
random task split broken down by category, while
Table 4 shows generalization splits.
6.1 Random Split
Both agents that leverage a predicted task descrip-
tion (HLLP and LLD) outperform the nonverbal
baseline on the random unseen task split. As shown
in Table 1, the describer module exhibits around
70% exact match accuracy on a set of unseen tasks
and 85% on a set of novel combinations of seen
training tasks and terrain constraints. The describer
properly identiﬁes over 75% of unseen tasks, which
are conveyed by the ﬁrst sentence of each descrip-
tion. It struggles with navigation and clearing sub-
tasks, which have uniquely short trajectories. De-
scription following agents achieve high task com-
pletion rates given the ground truth task description
(Table 2, middle). The HLLP agent outperforms
the LLD baseline by greater than 5%; however, the
latter is more effective at covering and clearing sub-
tasks, which require variable numbers of repeated
subtasks depending on the random map. The ex-
ecutor performs nearly perfect given oracle instruc-
tions (Table 2, bottom), indicating most description
following errors are made by the instructor.
EM (%)Describer Instructor
# Eval Valid Eval Eval
Tasks Full Goal Full Goal All Last
Random Split 15140 84 :3 92 :4 69 :3 75 :777 :45:1 79 :84:3
Navigation 700 10 :1 10 :6 0 :9 0 :960:116:6 85 :11:8
Crafting 5400 98 :0 98 :9 87 :4 88 :088:94:4 83 :24:7
Craft then Nav 880 88 :1 99 :4 84 :0 88 :189:79:6 97 :01:3
Build on Terrain 6040 83 :0 92 :9 63 :8 71 :778:08:1 81 :75:6
Cover Terrain 1680 71 :5 98 :5 59 :5 84 :360:75:1 52 :73:4
Clear Items 400 95 :2 95 :2 37 :0 37 :572:210:0 72 :911:0
Hid. Subtask 8900 84 :8 91 :4 14 :5 15 :843 :64:0 16 :54:8
Hid. Use Case 12860 84 :1 90 :3 19 :7 22 :240 :55:0 17 :76:8
Hid. Terr Destn 6520 84 :9 91 :8 0 :0 0 :026 :52:1 5 :11:4
Length Gen. 5445 85 :2 92 :0 69 :7 92 :962 :95:5 63 :88:1
Table 1: Describer and Instructor exact match (EM) against
gold references. Describer EM shown for Full text, and ﬁrst
sentence describing end Goal . Validation tasks have same end
goals as train, but novel terrain reward/penalty combinations.
Instructor EM shown for AllandLast instructions given.Completion (%) NV Baseline LLD HLLP
Demonstration Following
Overall 25 :27:0 65 :13:2 68 :42:2
Navigation 45:62:6 40 :51:3 46 :52:9
Crafting 44:413:7 79 :63:2 85 :51:7
Craft then Nav 45:414:3 89 :41:8 95 :11:4
Build on Terrain 9:12:7 54 :44:1 63 :03:4
Cover Terrain 5:42:9 61 :24:0 37 :91:7
Clear Items 11:65:6 39 :30:6 27 :06:3
Ground Truth Description Following
Overall –76 :73:6 82 :12:5
Navigation – 93:92:3 96 :22:9
Crafting – 86:03:3 92 :01:8
Craft then Nav – 90:11:5 95 :91:6
Build on Terrain – 67:24:7 81 :34:2
Cover Terrain – 64:84:2 43 :82:5
Clear Items – 85:83:8 67 :49:1
Ground Truth Instruction Following
Overall – – 97 :21:1
Navigation – – 95:71:5
Crafting – – 98:10:9
Craft then Nav – – 98:50:9
Build on Terrain – – 96:61:4
Cover Terrain – – 97:31:1
Clear Items – – 95:21:8
Table 2: Completion rates on random task splitjTraversalsjOracle NVB LLD HLLP
# Tasks + − + − + − + −
0 Rew 1 Pen 5880 – 7 –30 –12 –19
0 Rew 2 Pen 5595 – 17 –63 –29 –39
1 Rew 0 Pen 5490 9 –8 –8 –7 –
1 Rew 1 Pen 11670 9 7 7 32 8 12 7 20
2 Rew 0 Pen 5430 17 –15 –15 –14 –
Table 3: Average traversals on reward (+) or penalty
(−)-giving terrains by agents on random split. Tasks
are categorized by the number of such terrain types.
Adherence to Terrain Constraints Table 3 de-
picts the rate at which demonstration following
agents traverse penalty or reward terrains.6We
compare against an oracle traversal frequency. This
comparison is made difﬁcult by the variability
among the times taken by agents to either complete
a task or hit the 300-step limit. However, the results
suggest that the HLLP agent is worse at avoiding
penalty terrains than the LLD. All agents are close
to oracle performance at traversing reward terrains.
6.2 Generalization Splits
Hidden Subtask Models generally fail to gener-
alize to unseen compositional subtasks. The de-
scriber identiﬁes only 16% of the unseen end goals,
while the instructor predicts the correct ﬁnal in-
struction7at the same rate. Figure 6 (upper) shows
that given gold descriptions, the HLLP agent ac-
complishes only pig shrine tasks at all, while the
LLD also accomplishes diamond house at a low
rate. The executor often fails to handle unseen or-
acle instructions.8We ﬁnd that the HLLP tends
to acquire the correct recipe items, but often does
6Tasks may require traversing a penalty terrain on a ran-
domly generated map.
7This usually corresponds to the hidden subtask.
8e.g. the ﬁnal ‘build diamond house’ instruction.not generate the correct ﬁnal instruction or perform
the right pair of low-level build operations to place
the structure. The instructor correctly generates the
novel pig shrine concept around 30% of the time.
Hidden Use Case The nonverbal demonstration
follower completely fails to generalize tasks to new
use cases. The describer module successfully iden-
tiﬁes 20% of unseen use case tasks, but no latent
language agent completes more than 5% from pre-
dicted descriptions. We observe that completion of
the isolated training tasks is not perfect (Figure 6
middle), indicating that poor performance on this
split may be due to a lack of convergence on the
subtasks of interest, which underpopulate the train-
ing data. The executor module performs well on
unseen goldware andiron flooring use cases.
Hidden Terrain Destination Agents fail to gen-
eralize a terrain observed only as a reward/penalty
source to then being a destination for building tasks;
particularly for covering tasks. This is the case at
all abstraction levels; the executor given gold in-
structions completes 55% of build tasks but only
3% of cover tasks. The describer and instructor
modules fails to identify the end goal and end in-
struction at all; however, in 49% of describer fail-
ure cases, the predicted end goal differs from the
ground truth only by the speciﬁed destination (e.g.
on field instead of the desired on water ).
Length Generalization Both latent language
agents achieve moderate success on length gen-
eralization, particularly relative to the nonverbal
Completion (%) NV Baseline LLD HLLP
Demonstration Following
Hidden Subtask 2:51:4 1 :30:4 0 :40:3
Hidden Use Case 0:30:5 5 :11:5 5 :93:3
Hidden Terr Destn 1:60:9 4 :60:5 3 :70:7
Length Gen. 6:02:1 62 :63:8 57 :99:0
Description Following
Hidden Subtask –7:42:3 8 :03:1
Hidden Use Case –8:21:9 11 :86:9
Hidden Terr Destn –1:81:2 2 :81:2
Length Gen. –65:74:1 60 :99:1
Instruction Following
Hidden Subtask – – 15:67:2
Hidden Use Case – – 48:65:0
Hidden Terr Destn – – 35:37:2
Length Gen. – – 96:61:3
Table 4: Completion rates on generalization splits
baseline (6% vs 60%). The describer is extremely
successful at identifying long-trajectory tasks.
6.3 Discussion
Our results suggest that language serves as an ex-
pressive, generalization-promoting representation
for one-shot demonstration following agents. Our
suite of high-level tasks requires an agent to iden-
tify task concepts and their roles in composing
unique end goal and constraint combinations. Lan-
guage allows the describer module to communi-
cate such roles succinctly to the other modules,
which learn how compositional lexical groundings
guide high- and low-level policy decisions in a
new context. Learning to encode and plan on the
basis of a continuous representation of a demon-
stration trajectory is otherwise a very challenging
task. Intermediate-level planning on the basis of
LM decoding provides incremental improvements
upon nonverbal baselines on a random task split,
suggesting improved generalization to other maps
and unseen tasks sampled from the same distribu-
tion as those seen during training. However, we
ﬁnd that instruction-level latent language does not
meaningfully improve systematic compositional
generalization in either of our evaluation scenarios.
Reformulating policy search as sequence search
simpliﬁes it in certain useful ways–the improved
ﬂexibility and interpretability of text-based reason-
ing allows for pinpointing errors at multiple levels
of decision making, abstracts away low-level exe-
cution decisions that do not pertain to certain forms
of generalization, as we observe in our hidden use
case results. However, a latent language policy
alone is not a compositional generalization silver
bullet. Indeed, such challenges remain largely un-
solved, though recent approaches have suggested
Figure 6: Hidden subtask and use case tests by subtask.
incremental progress in speciﬁc cases (Andreas,
2020; Qiu et al., 2021; Conklin et al., 2021). We
hope that our benchmark adds to this discourse, and
that future work considers our evaluation frame-
work. We also welcome future work exploring
settings with complex subdependencies under time
limits . To improve stability, our instructor chooses
subtasks in an inoptimal canonical order that re-
quires text-based reasoning about high-level tasks,
but not spatial reasoning about object proximity.
7 Conclusion
Our goal is to design agents that learn new tasks
from single examples, with behavior rooted in lan-
guage. This is of broad interest to the NLP com-
munity, as one-shot learning of novel tasks com-
bats the typical need to collect and train massive
amounts of task data. This motivated the con-
struction of DescribeWorld, a task environment
for testing one-shot learning of complex tasks from
demonstrations. DescribeWorld allowed for the de-
velopment and evaluation of our hierarchical latent
language policy agent, which performs decision
making on the basis of text at multiple levels of ab-
straction. We found that models leveraging latent
language can improve upon nonverbal alternatives
in multiple evaluation scenarios, but that they can
struggle with forms of systematic generalization.
We observe that models can accomplish systemat-
ically novel tasks provided the correct decision is
made at a higher level of abstraction, which exem-
pliﬁes how hierarchical latent language provides a
mechanism for isolating the level of policy abstrac-
tion in which a generalization might occur.
References
Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce,
Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian D. Reid,
Stephen Gould, and Anton van den Hengel.
2018. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting
visually-grounded navigation instructions in real en-
vironments. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3674–
3683.
Jacob Andreas. 2020. Good-enough compositional
data augmentation. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 7556–7566, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and Sergey Levine. 2018.
Learning with latent language. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Pa-
pers) , pages 2166–2179, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lei Jimmy Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E.
Hinton. 2016. Layer normalization. CoRR ,
abs/1607.06450.
Samy Bengio, Yoshua Bengio, Jocelyn Cloutier, and
Jan Gecsei. 2007. On the optimization of a synaptic
learning rule.
Valerie Chen, Abhinav Gupta, and Kenneth Marino.
2021. Ask your humans: Using human instructions
to improve generalization in reinforcement learning.
InInternational Conference on Learning Represen-
tations .
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau,
Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. 2018.
Babyai: A platform to study the sample efﬁciency
of grounded language learning. In International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merriënboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning
phrase representations using RNN encoder–decoder
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Noam Chomsky. 1957. Syntactic Structures . De
Gruyter Mouton.
Henry Conklin, Bailin Wang, Kenny Smith, and Ivan
Titov. 2021. Meta-learning to compositionally gen-
eralize. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 3322–3335, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly C. Stadie,
Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya Sutskever,
P. Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2017. One-shot
imitation learning. ArXiv , abs/1703.07326.
Matthew Hausknecht and Peter Stone. 2015. Deep
recurrent q-learning for partially observable mdps.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.06527 .
Felix Hill, Andrew Lampinen, Rosalia Schneider,
Stephen Clark, Matthew Botvinick, James L Mc-
Clelland, and Adam Santoro. 2019. Environmental
drivers of systematicity and generalization in a situ-
ated agent. In International Conference on Learning
Representations .
Hengyuan Hu, Denis Yarats, Qucheng Gong, Yuan-
dong Tian, and Mike Lewis. 2019. Hierarchical de-
cision making by generating and following natural
language instructions. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran As-
sociates, Inc.
Athul Paul Jacob, Mike Lewis, and Jacob Andreas.
2021. Multitasking inhibits semantic drift. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages
5351–5366, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Minqi Jiang, Jelena Luketina, Nantas Nardelli,
Pasquale Minervini, Philip Torr, Shimon Whiteson,
and Tim Rocktäschel. 2020. Wordcraft: An envi-
ronment for benchmarking commonsense agents. In
Language in Reinforcement Learning Workshop at
ICML 2020 .
YiDing Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy,
and Chelsea Finn. 2019. Language as an abstraction
for hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
32:9419–9431.
Tristan Karch, Nicolas Lair, Cédric Colas, Jean-
Michel Dussoux, Clément Moulin-Frier, Pe-
ter Ford Dominey, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. 2020.
Language-goal imagination to foster creative
exploration in deep rl.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR
(Poster) .
Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. 2018. Generalization
without systematicity: On the compositional skills
of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In In-
ternational conference on machine learning , pages
2873–2882. PMLR.
Brenden Lake, Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2019.
Human few-shot learning of compositional instruc-
tions. In CogSci .
Brenden Lake and Gregory Murphy. 2021. Word mean-
ing in minds and machines. Psychological Review .
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2021. Cross-task general-
ization via natural language crowdsourcing instruc-
tions.
Dipendra Misra, Andrew Bennett, Valts Blukis, Eyvind
Niklasson, Max Shatkhin, and Yoav Artzi. 2018.
Mapping instructions to actions in 3d environments
with visual goal prediction. In EMNLP .
Xinlei Pan, Tingnan Zhang, Brian Ichter, Aleksandra
Faust, Jie Tan, and Sehoon Ha. 2020. Zero-shot imi-
tation learning from demonstrations for legged robot
visual navigation. 2020 IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages
679–685.
Oﬁr Press and Lior Wolf. 2017. Using the output em-
bedding to improve language models. In Proceed-
ings of the 15th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Volume 2, Short Papers , pages 157–163, Valencia,
Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Linlu Qiu, Hexiang Hu, Bowen Zhang, Peter Shaw,
and Fei Sha. 2021. Systematic generalization on
gSCAN: What is nearly solved and what is next?
InProceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2180–2188, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell.
2011. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the fourteenth international conference
on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics .
Laura Ruis, Jacob Andreas, Marco Baroni, Diane
Bouchacourt, and Brenden M Lake. 2020. A bench-
mark for systematic generalization in grounded lan-
guage understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems , 33.
Jurgen Schmidhuber. 1987. Evolutionary principles in
self-referential learning. on learning now to learn:
The meta-meta-meta...-hook. Diploma thesis, Tech-
nische Universitat Munchen, Germany, 14 May.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon,
Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. 2020. ALFRED:
A Benchmark for Interpreting Grounded Instruc-
tions for Everyday Tasks. In The IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) .
Sungryull Sohn, Junhyuk Oh, and Honglak Lee. 2018.
Hierarchical reinforcement learning for zero-shot
generalization with subtask dependencies. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pages 7156–7166.
Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Y . Pratt. 1998. Learning to
learn. arXiv: Learning , pages 354–354.Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30 .
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y . Zhao, Kelvin
Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
drew M. Dai, and Quoc V . Le. 2021. Finetuned lan-
guage models are zero-shot learners.
Orion Weller, Nicholas Lourie, Matt Gardner, and
Matthew E. Peters. 2020. Learning from task de-
scriptions. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP) , pages 1361–1375, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Tsung-Yen Yang, Michael Hu, Yinlam Chow, Peter
Ramadge, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2021. Safe
reinforcement learning with natural language con-
straints.
Tianhe Yu, Chelsea Finn, Annie Xie, Sudeep Dasari,
Tianhao Zhang, P. Abbeel, and Sergey Levine.
2018. One-shot imitation from observing hu-
mans via domain-adaptive meta-learning. ArXiv ,
abs/1802.01557.
Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Alessandro Sor-
doni, Romain Laroche, Remi Tachet des Combes,
Matthew Hausknecht, and Adam Trischler. 2018.
Counting to explore and generalize in text-based
games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.11525 .
Allan Zhou, Eric Jang, Daniel Kappler, Alexander Her-
zog, Mohi Khansari, Paul Wohlhart, Yunfei Bai, Mri-
nal Kalakrishnan, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
2020. Watch, try, learn: Meta-learning from demon-
strations and reward. ArXiv , abs/1906.03352.
Contents in Appendices:
•In Appendix A, we provide further details of
the DescribeWorldframework.
•In Appendix C, we describe modeling details
of all our proposed agents and baselines.
•In Appendix D, we provide training and im-
plementation details of our agents.
•In Appendix E, we show additional experi-
ment results.
A Environment Details
As depicted in Figure 2, the procedurally generated
map (Figure 2(a)) is an 8x8 (10x10 with a wall bor-
der) grid whose cells may be populated with walls,
terrains and interactable objects. Terrains are either
lava ,field orwater . Some objects disappear
upon interaction ( tree ,stone . . . ) or transform
(furnace!lit furnace ), or are permanent ﬁx-
tures ( lumbershop ,workspace . . . ) at which the
agent can perform crafting operations.
The set of possible agent actions comprises di-
rectional movement ( fup;down;left;rightg, in-
teract actions (fpick up ;use-1 : : :use-5g, and
place actions (fplace-1 : : :place-4g) Subtasks
generally have a set of prerequisite subtasks (e.g.
make stone pickaxe requires get wood andget
stone ). The requirements for a subtask do not
change across tasks, i.e. make stone pickaxe
always requires the same prerequisites and ac-
tion/location combination.
Crafting tasks require the agent to perform a spe-
ciﬁc interact action while in the cell of a speciﬁc
object ( make stone pickaxe requires the agent
to perform use-1 while on top of the workspace .
Building tasks require the agent to perform a use
action on a cell without an item already inside it.
place -based tasks can be performed anywhere re-
gardless of the presence of an item or existing ter-
rain.
If the agent performs actions that render an end
goal unattainable (e.g. build house on field
but the agent covers all ﬁelds with other objects),
the game immediately ends and produces a large
negative reward.
A.1 Task Recipes
Figure 7 depicts the full set of DescribeWorld sub-
tasks and their dependencies.A.2 License
The Mining environment (Sohn et al., 2018) on
which our code is licensed under the MIT license.
B Synthetic Text Generation
Every subtask in our dependency graph is as-
sociated with a single NL phrase, as shown in
Figure 7. To express task descriptions in NL,
we use templates with slots for subtasks, land-
marks and terrains; e.g. <build_subtask> on
<terrain>. We take an object-oriented approach
to deﬁning end goals, the code for which will be
part of our public release. Every goal class, e.g.
BuildTargetLocationGoal ,ClearItemGoal or
SubtaskThenDestinationGoal is associated with
a different NL template. Terrain constraints are
treated similarly, with slots for terrain type ( Avoid
walking on the <terrain>. andWalking on
the <terrain> will reward you .
To generate oracle instructions during training,
we associate with each necessary subtask an in-
struction to go to a requisite landmark (if neces-
sary) then perform the subtask, e.g. go to tree
and cut wood orgo to water and build house .
If the instructor needs to convey navigational con-
straints, we append them to the end of the instruc-
tion, as in go to the workspace and make stone
pickaxe. avoid walking on lava . Figures 8
and 9 show more examples of instructions.
C Modeling Details
In this section, we provide detailed information
of our agents. In Appendix C.1, we will describe
some common basic components in the agent ar-
chitecture. Later on, we will describe each of the
proposed agents mentioned in Section 5.
Notations
We use game step tto denote one round of interac-
tion between an agent with the environment. We
useotto denote text observation at game step t.ot
may contain different components depending on a
speciﬁc context, we will describe individual cases
in later subsections. Brackets [;]denote vector
concatenation. We use jsjto represent the length
of (number of tokens in) a sequence s. We use h
andwto denote the height and width of an input
image, when the image is ﬂattened, the vector size
ishw.
Figure 7: Full subtask dependency graph for the DescribeWorld task environment.
Action 2
Base Item Prerequisites Action 1 use_1 use_2 use_3 use_4 use_5
flooring spade place_2 wood flooring iron flooring silver flooring gold flooring diamond flooring
barn hay, wood slats use_2 barn chicken barn pig barn
house iron, wood slats use_3 house silver house gold house diamond house
shrine gold ore, silver ore use_4 wood shrine iron shrine chicken shrine pig shrine diamond shrine
Table 5: List of two-action compositional building/placing recipes
C.1 Common Modules
C.1.1 Text Encoder
We use a transformer-based text encoder, which
consists of an embedding layer and a transformer
block (Vaswani et al., 2017). Speciﬁcally, we tok-
enize an input otwith the HuggingFace GPT-2 tok-
enizer9. We convert the tokens into 128-dimension
embeddings, the embedding matrix is initialized
randomly.
The transformer block consists of a stack of 4
convolutional layers, a self-attention layer, and a
2-layer MLP with a ReLU non-linear activation
function in between. Within the block, each convo-
lutional layer has 128 ﬁlters, with a kernel size of 7.
The self-attention layers use a block hidden size of
128, with 4 attention heads. Layer normalization
(Ba et al., 2016) is applied after each layer inside
the block. Following standard transformer training,
we add positional embeddings into each block’s
input.
At every game step t, the text encoder encodes
ot2Rjotjand results a representation hot2
9https://huggingface.co/transformers/model_
doc/gpt2.html#gpt2tokenizerRjotjH,H= 128 is the hidden size.
C.1.2 Image Encoder
We propose two image encoder architectures, each
tackling a different type of input:
Basic: The basic image encoder is adopted from
the BabyAI baseline model (Chevalier-Boisvert
et al., 2018). Speciﬁcally, given a symbolic im-
age input M2Zhwc
0, we use an image bag-
of-word (BOW) embedding layer to convert the
integer inputs into real-valued embeddings with
sizehwcH, where h,wandcdenotes the
height, width, and channels of the image, H= 128
is the embedding size. We sum up the channel
dimension, resulting EM2RhwH.
Next, the image embeddings are fed into a
stacked residual convolutional blocks:
hl+1= ResidualBlockl(hl);
h0=EM:(1)
Each residual block consists of two convolutional
layers, with kernel size of 3 and output channel size
of 128. Batch normalization is applied after every
convolutional layer, followed by a ReLU non-linear
activation function. Before the last ReLU, we apply
a residual connection, which adds the block input
into the output of the last batch norm layer.
The output size of the stacked residual blocks
ishwH, we ﬂatten its spatial dimensions to
result the image encoding hM2RhwH.
Consecutive: In the consecutive image encoder,
we aim to capture the difference between two
consecutive images. Given two images Mt 12
Zhwc
0andMt2Zhwc
0, we ﬁrst compute their
difference Mdiff2Zhwc. We convert the integer
inputs into real-valued vectors using image BOW
embedding layers, resulting Et 12RhwH,
Et2RhwHandEdiff2RhwH. Note Mdiff
uses a separate image BOW embedding layer.
To aggregate the three image embeddings, we
feed their concatenation into an Multilayer Percep-
tron (MLP):
EM= Tanh(Linear([ Et 1;Et;Ediff]));(2)
where EM2RhwH. We use the same convo-
lutional architecture to produce image encoding
hM2RhwHas in the basic image encoder.
C.1.3 Aggregator
To aggregate two input encodings P2RjPjHand
Q2RjQjH, we use the standard multi-head atten-
tion mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017). Speciﬁcally,
we use Pas the query ,Qas the keyandvalue . This
results an output PQ2RjPjH, where at every
time step i2[0;jPj),Pi
Qis the weighted sum of
Q, the weight is the attention of PionQ. We re-
fer readers to (Vaswani et al., 2017) for detailed
information.
We apply a residual connection on top of
the multi-head attention mechanism in order to
maintain the original information contained in P.
Speciﬁcally,
hPQ= Tanh(Linear([ PQ;P])); (3)
where hPQ2RjPjH.
C.1.4 Text Decoder
We use a transformer-based text decoder to gener-
ate text. The decoder consists of a word embedding
layer, a stacked transformer blocks and a projection
layer.
Similar to the text encoder, the embedding layer
is initialized with random embedding matrix. In-
side the transformer block, there is one self atten-
tion layer, one multi-head attention layer and a2-layer MLP with ReLU non-linear activation func-
tions in between. Taking word embedding vectors
as input, the self-attention layer ﬁrst generates a
contextual encoding vectors for the words. These
vectors are then fed into the multi-head attention
layer, to compute attention with representations
produced by the encoder, which contains informa-
tion from multiple modalities. The resulting vec-
tors are fed into the 2-layer MLP. The block hidden
size of this transformer is 128.
Subsequently, the output of the stacked trans-
former blocks is fed into the projection layer, which
is a linear transformation with output size same as
the vocabulary size. We follow (Press and Wolf,
2017), tying the input embeddings and this projec-
tion layer. The logits resulted from the projection
layer are then normalized by a softmax to gener-
ate a probability distribution over all tokens in the
GPT-2 vocabulary.
Following common practice, we use a mask to
prevent the decoder transformer to access “future”
information during training. We set the max num-
ber of generated tokens to be 30. During inference,
the decoder will stop generating whenever gener-
ates the end-of-sequence special token, or exhausts
all its budget.
C.2 Hierarchical Latent Language Policy
Agent (HLLP)
C.2.1 Describer
As brieﬂy mentioned in Section 4, the describer
module “summarizes” a demonstration into a short
text, where a demonstration typically a sequence
of multi-modal transitions. As shown in Figure 5,
at every step tof a demonstration, the transition
contains the symbolic images at previous step and
current step: Mt 1andMt, and the text input
ot= [at 1;rt 1;It], where at 1,rt 1,Itdenote
the action taken at previous step, the resulting re-
ward, and the inventory state at current step, respec-
tively.
We ﬁrst encode the text input with an text en-
coder described in Appendix C.1.1, similarly, we
encode the image inputs with an consecutive image
encoder described in Appendix C.1.2. We sub-
sequently use two attention blocks described in
Appendix C.1.3 to compute the image encoding’s
attention over text (tokens), and vice versa, the text
encoding’s attention over image (pixels). We aver-
age both the attention-aggregated outputs, resulting
himg!text2RHandhtext!img2RH, to com-
pute the overall representation of this time step:
ht= Tanh(Linear([ himg!text;htext!img]));(4)
where ht2RH,H= 128 is the hidden size.
At the episode level, we use a Transformer-based
encoder, with similar architecture to the one in our
text encoder. Speciﬁcally, the episode encoder is
a stacked 2-layer Transformer blocks, which out-
putshdemoi2RjdemoijH,jdemoijis the number
of steps of a demonstration demoi,His hidden
size.
Finally, we use a text decoder, as described in
Appendix C.1.4, to generate text descriptions.
In the describer module, we use a 2-layer text
encoder, a 5-layer image encoder, a 2-layer episode
encoder, and a 3-layer decoder.
C.2.2 Instructor
As shown in Figure 5, the instructor consists a
text encoder, a basic graph encoder, an attention
mechanism, a text decoder, and a new instruction
classiﬁer.
Speciﬁcally, at a game step t, the image encoder
takes the image input Mtas input, generates im-
age representations vt2RhwH, where hand
ware the height and width of the image. At the
same time, the text encoder encodes the text in-
putot= [D;It;Instr t 1], where D,ItandInstr t 1
denote the task description (either generated by
the describer, or provided by an oracle), the in-
ventory state at current step, and the instruction
at previous game step. The text encoder outputs
wt2RjotjH. Next, an attention block as de-
scribed in Appendix C.1.3 aggregates vtandwt,
resulting st2RjotjHthat contains information
from both modalities, where jotjdenotes number
of tokens in ot.
The new instruction classiﬁer is an MLP switch
module that decides whether or not the instruction
generated at previous step is still valid (i.e., is it
necessary to generate a new instruction):
s0
t= MaskedMean( st);
pt= Argmax( L1(Tanh( L0(s0
t)))):(5)
In which, L0andL1are linear transformations with
hidden size of 128 and 2, respectively. The output
pt2f0;1gis the discrete switch.
In the case where pt= 0, we directly pass the
instruction generated at previous step along as out-
put; otherwise, a text decoder as described in Ap-pendix C.1.4 will generate a new instruction word-
by-word conditioned on st.
In the describer module, we use a single layer
text encoder, a 2-layer image encoder, and a 2-layer
decoder. The text encoder and image encoder are
tied with the corresponding layers in the executor
module. During training, we do not update the
image encoder.
C.2.3 Executor
Given the intermediate level text instruction, our
executor module translates them into low level ac-
tions to interact with the environment. As shown
in Figure 5, the executor consists a text encoder,
a basic graph encoder, an attention block, and a
recurrent action generator.
Similar to the instructor module, the image en-
coder and text encoder convert image input ( Mt)
and text input ( ItandInstr t]) into hidden repre-
sentations. Note in the executor, to facilitate in-
teraction between the instruction Instr t]with other
text inputs, we encode ItandInstr t]separately and
aggregate them using an attention mechanism.
Subsequently, given the image representation vt
and the aggregated text representation wt, we apply
attention block (as described in Appendix C.1.3)
from both directions:
hvw= Attention( vt; wt);
hwv= Attention( wt; vt);
h0
vw= MaskedMean( hvw);
h0
wv= MaskedMean( hwv);
st= Tanh(Linear([ h0
vw;h0
wv]));(6)
in which, st2RH,H= 128 is hidden dimension.
In order to encourage the action generator to
condition on history information, we equip it with
a recurrent memory (Cho et al., 2014):
s1:t= GRU( st; s1:t 1); (7)
the hidden size of the GRU is 128. We stack an
MLP on top of the recurrent memory to obtain the
output distribution over all actions:
ht= Tanh(Linear( s1:t));
pat= Softmax(Linear( ht));
at= Argmax( pat):(8)
In the executor module, we use a single layer
text encoder and a 2-layer image encoder. The text
encoder and image encoder are tied with the corre-
sponding layers in the instructor module. During
training, we do not update the text encoder.
C.3 Latent Language Description Only
Baseline (LLD)
The LLD baseline shares the same describer archi-
tecture, and a similar executor architecture with
HLLP, its main difference is the absence of an in-
structor.
In its executor, at a game step t, the inputs are
an image Mtand a short text ot= [D;It], where
Dis the description generated by the describer (or
the oracle description during training), Itis the
agent’s inventory state. To obtain the text repre-
sentation wt, the LLD agent simply encode otwith
the text encoder as described in Appendix C.1.1,
without performing attention between DandIt(as
in HLLP). The rest of the executor components are
identical to HLLP (Appendix C.2.3).
In the LLD baseline, we use a single layer text
encoder and a 2-layer image encoder.
C.4 Nonverbal Baseline (NV)
In the nonverbal baseline, we do not use lan-
guage as latent representations between modules.
Speciﬁcally, given a demonstration demoi, we
use a describer similar to the one outlined in Ap-
pendix C.2.1, but without decoding the demonstra-
tion representation into text. The output of the
describer is hdemoi2RjdemoijH, wherejdemoijis
the number of steps in demoi,His hidden size.
In our nonverbal baseline’s executor, at game
stept, a text encoder encodes the inventory state It
intowt; an image encoder encodes an input image
Mtintovt. We use multi-head attention blocks
(Appendix C.1.3) to aggregate information carried
by image ( vt), text ( wt), and demonstration repre-
sentation ( hdemoi):
h0
demoi= MaskedMean( hdemoi);
hdemo!img= Attention( h0
demoi; vt);
hdemo!text= Attention( h0
demoi; wt);
htext!img= Attention( wt; vt);
himg!text= Attention( vt; wt);
h0
text!img= MaskedMean( htext!img);
h0
img!text= MaskedMean( himg!text):(9)
Subsequently, we use an MLP to combine them:
hcombined =[h0
demoi;
hdemo!img;hdemo!text;
h0
text!img;h0
img!text];
st=Tanh(Linear( hcombined ));(10)in which, the output st2RH,H= 128 is hidden
dimension.
The remainder of the executor is identical to the
executor used in the HLLP agent, as described in
Appendix C.2.3.
In the nonverbal baseline, we use a single layer
text encoder and a 2-layer image encoder.
D Training and Implementation Details
For all experiments, we use Adam (Kingma and Ba,
2015) as the optimizer. The learning rate is set to
0.001 with a clip gradient norm of 5.
D.1 Describer Training via Supervised
Learning
We use a set of pre-collected expert demonstra-
tions paired with ground-truth descriptions to train
the describer module in HLLP. Because demonstra-
tions are long sequences of agent transitions, which
can be memory consuming, we cut long demon-
strations and only keep their last 100 transition
steps. Since the length of demonstration varies, we
speed up training by sorting the data points by their
demonstration length, and split them by buckets
with a bucket size of 2,000. For every mini-batch
(we use a batch size of 20), we ﬁrst randomly sam-
ple a bucket, then randomly sample a batch of data
point from that bucket. We train the describer for 5
million episodes (250,000 batches).
D.2 Description Follower Training via
DAgger
We train the description follower modules (instruc-
tor and executor in HLLP, executor in LLD, and
the entire nonverbal baseline) using DAgger (Ross
et al., 2011), an imitation learning method.
Speciﬁcally, during the training process, the
agent starts with totally following the expert
demonstrations, then we gradually let the agent to
take over the control. The expert takes the form of a
greedy oracle that identiﬁes eligible and necessary
subtask landmarks, navigates to them according to
a traversal cost graph that considers terrain rewards
and penalties, then performs the subtask. We ini-
tially had the oracle complete whichever eligible
subtask required the fewest steps. However, this
led to training instability due to the compounded
difﬁculty of inferring required subtasks and select-
ing an eligibility-adherent completion order based
on distances in a random map. Instead, we choose
the ﬁrst eligible subtask in a canonically-ordered
list.
We collect such trajectories (i.e., sequences of
transitions, along the expert demonstrations if the
agent takes over control), without updating the net-
work, into a replay buffer of size 500,000. We peri-
odically (after every 5 data collection steps) sample
batches of transitions from the replay buffer, and
update the network. Speciﬁcally, following the
training strategy used in the recurrent DQN liter-
ature (Hausknecht and Stone, 2015; Yuan et al.,
2018), we sample batches of transition sequences
(of length 8), we use the ﬁrst 4 transitions to esti-
mate the recurrent states, and the last 4 transitions
for updating the model parameters. We use a mini-
batch of size 32 in replay data collection, and a
batch size of 64 for update. We linearly anneal the
fraction of expert assistance in DAgger from 100%
to 1% within 500,000 episodes.
When training the HLLP agent, as depicted in
Figure 5, we tie the encoder parameters between
the instructor and the executor. In which, the image
encoder is only updated through the executor loss,
whereas the text encoder is only updated through
the instructor loss. To stabilize the training, we
update the instructor and executor modules in an
alternate manner, with a frequency of 2,000 (expe-
rience data collection) episodes.
We train the description following agents for 1
million episodes maximally, however, in practice,
the agents mostly converge sooner. We set an pa-
tience of 100,000 episodes, the training process
will terminate if there is no improvement within
this period.
D.3 Resources
We use a mixture of Nvidia V100/P100/P40 GPUs
to train all models; on average experiments (train-
ing with environment simulation) take 3-4 days,
but the wall clock time can vary.
E Supplementary Results
Table 1 Shows describer module exact match per-
formance against gold references in all splits and
task categories.
Table 7 shows full task completion performance
by agents on the hidden terrain destination gener-
alization set set decomposed by task category. Ta-
ble 8 shows the same for the length generalization
set.
Figure 8 depicts example unrolled trajectoriesValid Eval
Full Task End Goal Full Task End Goal
Random Split 84 :3 92 :4 69 :3 75 :7
Navigation 10:1 10 :6 0 :9 0 :9
Crafting 98:0 98 :9 87 :4 88 :0
Craft then Nav 88:1 99 :4 84 :0 88 :1
Building on Terrain 83:0 92 :9 63 :8 71 :7
Covering Terrain 71:5 98 :5 59 :5 84 :3
Clearing Items 95:2 95 :2 37 :0 37 :5
Hidden Subtask 84 :8 91 :4 14 :5 15 :8
Crafting 97:8 98 :4 36 :1 36 :4
Craft then Nav 88:2 98 :3 32 :8 32 :8
Building on Terrain 84:6 93 :0 6 :4 7 :5
Covering Terrain 74:9 97 :6 7 :2 12 :1
Hidden Use Case 84 :1 90 :3 19 :7 22 :2
Crafting 95:1 95 :6 29 :1 29 :3
Craft then Nav 90:4 99 :7 46 :2 47 :5
Building on Terrain 84:6 93 :9 20 :3 23 :5
Covering Terrain 75:3 97 :7 4 :0 7 :4
Hidden Terrain Destination 84 :9 91 :8 0 :0 0 :0
Building on Terrain 84:0 94 :4 0 :0 0 :0
Covering Terrain 71:9 97 :7 0 :0 0 :0
Hidden Length 85 :2 92 :0 69 :7 92 :9
Crafting 97:3 98 :1 95 :6 99 :1
Craft then Nav 89:9 99 :6 89 :1 100 :0
Building on Terrain 82:9 93 :2 74 :4 91 :0
Covering Terrain 76:8 97 :1 58 :9 92 :6
Clearing Items 98:8 99 :1 100 :0 100 :0
Table 6: Expanded performance of Describer module
against gold references in all splits and task categories.
Validation scores for task categories not in an eval set
are not shown.
NV Baseline LLD HLLP
Demonstration Following
Overall 1:60:9 4 :60:5 3 :70:7
Building on Terrain 2:51:5 7 :40:8 6 :01:1
Covering Terrain 0:00:0 0 :10:0 0 :00:0
Ground Truth Description Following
Overall –1:81:2 2 :81:2
Building on Terrain – 2:92:0 4 :51:9
Covering Terrain – 0:00:0 0 :10:1
Ground Truth Instruction Following
Overall – – 35:37:2
Building on Terrain – – 55:111:2
Covering Terrain – – 3:10:8
Table 7: Performance on hidden terrain destination
split broken down by task category
produced by the oracle. Figure 9 depicts example
failure cases by the HLLP agent on the generaliza-
tion splits.
build fence on silver flooring, then reach the jeweler.
avoid walking on the field. walking on the lava will reward you.
================================================
I0: cut wood, stepping on lava and avoiding field (9 steps)
I1: get stone, stepping on the lava and avoiding the field
(3 steps)
I2: get string, stepping on the lava and avoiding the field
(4 steps)
I3: get spade, stepping on the lava and avoiding the field
(4 steps)
I4: make stick, stepping on the lava and avoiding the field
(6 steps)
I5: make wood slats (1 steps)
I6: make stone pickaxe, stepping on the lava and avoiding
the field (7 steps)
I7: get coal, stepping on the lava and avoiding the field
(4 steps)
I8: get silver ore, stepping on the lava and avoiding the
field (11 steps)
I9: light furnace, stepping on the lava and avoiding the
field (3 steps)
I10: smelt silver (1 steps)
I11: place silver flooring on empty cell, stepping on the lava
and avoiding the field (3 steps)
I12: build fence on silver flooring (1 steps)
I13: go to jeweler, stepping on the lava and avoiding the
field (5 steps)
game ended after 62 stepsmake net and place silver flooring covering all the
water in any order. avoid walking on the field.
================================================
I0: cut wood, avoiding the field (5 steps)
I1: get stone, avoiding the field (7 steps)
I2: get string, avoiding the field (7 steps)
I3: get spade, avoiding the field (7 steps)
I4: make firewood, avoiding the field (6 steps)
I5: make stick (1 steps)
I6: make net (1 steps)
I7: make stone pickaxe, avoiding the field (5 steps)
I8: get silver ore, avoiding the field (2 steps)
I9: light furnace, avoiding the field (10 steps)
I10: smelt silver (1 steps)
I11: place silver flooring covering water, avoiding the field
(4 steps)
I12: place silver flooring covering water, avoiding the field
(3 steps)
I13: place silver flooring covering water, avoiding the field
(3 steps)
I14: place silver flooring covering water, avoiding the field
(3 steps)
I15: place silver flooring covering water, avoiding the field
(3 steps)
I16: place silver flooring covering water, avoiding the field
(3 steps)
I17: place silver flooring covering water, avoiding the field
(3 steps)
game ended after 88 steps
dig dirt covering all the water, then reach the workspace.
================================================
I0: get spade (8 steps)
I1: dig dirt covering water (2 steps)
I2: dig dirt covering water (2 steps)
I3: dig dirt covering water (3 steps)
I4: dig dirt covering water (2 steps)
I5: dig dirt covering water (2 steps)
I6: dig dirt covering water (2 steps)
I7: dig dirt covering water (3 steps)
I8: dig dirt covering water (2 steps)
I9: dig dirt covering water (3 steps)
I10: dig dirt covering water (2 steps)
I11: dig dirt covering water (2 steps)
game ended after 32 stepsclear all of the grasses and the irons.
================================================
I0: cut wood (6 steps)
I1: get stone (5 steps)
I2: get string (5 steps)
I3: make stick (12 steps)
I4: make stone pickaxe (2 steps)
I5: make scythe (1 steps)
I6: get iron ore (4 steps)
I7: get iron ore (3 steps)
I8: cut hay (4 steps)
I9: cut hay (4 steps)
I10: cut hay (10 steps)
game ended after 56 steps
build pig barn on dirt and build diamond house on silver flooring
in any order.
================================================
I0: cut wood (8 steps)
I1: get stone (3 steps)
I2: get string (2 steps)
I3: get spade (12 steps)
I4: make stick (12 steps)
I5: make trap (1 steps)
I6: make net (1 steps)
I7: make wood slats (1 steps)
I8: make stone pickaxe (7 steps)
I9: catch pig (3 steps)
I10: make scythe (3 steps)
I11: get coal (16 steps)
I12: get iron ore (15 steps)
I13: get silver ore (5 steps)
I14: cut hay (5 steps)
I15: dig dirt on empty cell (2 steps)
I16: light furnace (12 steps)
I17: build pig barn on dirt (13 steps)
I18: smelt iron (12 steps)
I19: smelt silver (1 steps)
I20: make iron pickaxe (4 steps)
I21: get diamond ore (3 steps)
I22: place silver flooring on empty cell (5 steps)
I23: build diamond house on silver flooring (2 steps)
game ended after 148 steps (task was completed)place diamond flooring on field, then reach the lumbershop.
================================================
I0: cut wood (11 steps)
I1: get stone (5 steps)
I2: get spade (4 steps)
I3: make stick (6 steps)
I4: make stone pickaxe (7 steps)
I5: get coal (5 steps)
I6: get iron ore (7 steps)
I7: light furnace (6 steps)
I8: smelt iron (1 steps)
I9: make iron pickaxe (6 steps)
I10: get diamond ore (3 steps)
I11: place diamond flooring on field (5 steps)
I12: go to lumbershop (4 steps)
game ended after 70 steps
Figure 8: Example unrolled oracle trajectories
Hidden Subtask
erect pig shrine.
================================================
I.0: cut wood
I.1: get stone
I.2: get string
I.3: make stick
I.4: make trap
I.5: make net
I.6: make stone pickaxe
I.7: catch pig
I.8: get coal
I.9: get iron ore
I.10: get silver ore
I.11: light furnace
I.12: smelt iron
I.13: make iron pickaxe
I.14: get gold ore <pig shrine now eligible>
I.15: erect pig shrine <agent erects iron shrine>
I.16: erect pig shrine <agent erects iron shrine on same cell>
<repeats until time limit>
game ended after 300 steps (task incomplete)build diamond house.
================================================
I.0: cut wood
I.1: get stone
I.2: get string
I.3: make stick
I.4: make wood slats
I.5: make stone pickaxe
I.6: get coal
I.7: get iron ore
I.8: light furnace
I.9: smelt iron
I.10: make iron pickaxe
I.11: get gold ore
I.12: get diamond ore <diamond house now eligible>
I.13: erect diamond shrine <agent erects diamond shrine unsuccessfully>
I.13: erect diamond shrine <agent erects diamond shrine unsuccessfully>
<repeats until time limit>
game ended after 300 steps (task incomplete)
Hidden Use Case
place iron flooring covering all the lava and erect pig shrine
on silver flooring in any order.
================================================
I.0: cut wood
I.1: get stone
I.2: get string
I.3: get spade
I.4: make stick
I.5: make trap
I.6: make net
I.7: make stone pickaxe
I.8: catch pig
I.9: get coal
I.10: get iron ore
I.11: get silver ore
I.12: light furnace
I.13: smelt iron
I.14: smelt silver
I.15: make iron pickaxe
I.16: place iron flooring covering lava
I.17: place iron flooring covering lava
I.18: place iron flooring covering lava
I.19: place iron flooring covering lava <lava fully covered>
I.20: place iron flooring covering lava
<repeats until time limit>
game ended after 300 steps (task incomplete, no pig shrine)build chicken barn on road and get gold ore in any order.
================================================
I.0: cut wood
I.1: get stone
I.2: get string
I.3: catch chicken
I.4: make stick
I.5: make wood slats
I.6: make stone pickaxe
I.7: make scythe
I.8: get coal
I.9: get iron ore
I.10: cut hay
I.11: light furnace
I.12: build chicken barn on empty cell
I.13: smelt iron
I.14: make iron pickaxe
I.15: get gold ore
<repeats until time limit>
game ended after 300 steps (task incomplete, barn not in road)
Hidden Terrain Destination
place silver flooring covering all the water.
================================================
I.0: cut wood
I.1: get stone
I.2: get spade
I.3: make stick
I.4: make stone pickaxe
I.5: get coal
I.6: get silver ore
I.7: light furnace
I.8: smelt silver
I.9: place silver flooring covering field
<repeats until time limit>
game ended after 300 steps (task incomplete, water not covered)build fence on water.
================================================
I.0: cut wood
I.1: get string
I.2: make wood slats
I.3: build fence on empty cell
<repeats until time limit>
game ended after 300 steps (task incomplete, fence not on water)
Figure 9: Example agent failure cases on generalization splits
# Tasks NVB LLD HLLP
Demonstration Following
Overall 6:02:1 62 :63:8 57 :99:0
Crafting 1905 29:98:1 82 :53:5 86 :011:6
Build on Terr 6330 4:92:9 58 :94:5 69 :613:2
Cover Terr 7830 0:30:4 59 :73:9 41 :15:4
Craft then Nav 165 36:43:8 91 :84:6 88 :68:9
Clear Itm 105 18:59:1 87 :85:1 42 :111:3
Ground Truth Description Following
Overall –65:74:1 60 :99:1
Crafting 1905 – 82:83:4 86 :311:6
Build on Terr 6330 – 62:44:9 75 :113:8
Cover Terr 7830 – 63:34:1 42 :95:3
Craft then Nav 165 – 91:84:6 88 :49:2
Clear Itm 105 – 87:85:1 42 :111:3
Ground Truth Instruction Following
Overall – – 96:61:3
Crafting 1905 – – 97:41:9
Build on Terr 6330 – – 97:11:2
Cover Terr 7830 – – 95:91:4
Craft then Nav 165 – – 98:70:9
Clear Itm 105 – – 96:61:6
Table 8: Length generalization results