Title: Towards AI-Complete Question Answering: A Set of Prerequisite Toy Tasks

arXiv:1502.05698v10  [cs.AI]  31 Dec 2015Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
TOWARDS AI-COMPLETE QUESTION ANSWERING :
A SET OFPREREQUISITE TOYTASKS
JasonWeston,AntoineBordes, Sumit Chopra,AlexanderM. Ru sh,
BartvanMerri ¨enboer,Armand Joulin& TomasMikolov
FacebookAIResearch
770Broadway
NewYork,USA
{jase,abordes,spchopra,tmikolov,sashar,bartvm }@fb.com
ABSTRACT
One long-term goal of machine learning research is to produc e methods that are
applicable to reasoningand natural language,in particula r building an intelligent
dialogue agent. To measure progress towards that goal, we ar gue for the use-
fulness of a set of proxy tasks that evaluate reading compreh ension via question
answering. Ourtasksmeasureunderstandinginseveralways : whetherasystemis
abletoanswerquestionsviachainingfacts,simpleinducti on,deductionandmany
more. The tasks are designed to be prerequisites for any syst em that aims to be
capable of conversingwith a human. We believe many existing learning systems
can currently not solve them, and hence our aim is to classify these tasks into
skill sets, so that researchers can identify (and then recti fy) the failings of their
systems. We also extendand improvethe recently introduced MemoryNetworks
model,andshowitis abletosolvesome,butnotall,ofthetas ks.
1 INTRODUCTION
There is a rich history of the use of synthetic tasks in machin e learning, from the XOR problem
which helped motivate neural networks (Minsky& Papert, 196 9; Rumelhartet al., 1985), to circle
andringdatasetsthathelpedmotivatesomeofthemostwell- knownclusteringandsemi-supervised
learning algorithms (Nget al., 2002; Zhuetal., 2003), Mack ey Glass equations for time series
(M¨ ulleret al., 1997), and so on – in fact some of the well know n UCI datasets (Bache&Lichman,
2013) are synthetic aswell (e.g., waveform ). Recent workcontinuesthistrend. For example,in the
area of developing learning algorithms with a memory compon ent synthetic datasets were used to
help developboth the Neural TuringMachineof Gravesetal. ( 2014) and the MemoryNetworksof
Weston etal. (2014),thelatterofwhichisrelevanttothisw ork.
Oneofthereasonsfortheinterestinsyntheticdataisthati tcanbeeasiertodevelopnewtechniques
using it. It is well known that working with large amounts of r eal data (“big data”) tends to lead
researchers to simpler models as “simple models and a lot of d ata trump more elaborate models
based on less data” (Halevyet al., 2009). For example, N-gramsfor language modelingwork well
relative to existing competing methods, but are far from bei ng a model that truly understands text.
As researcherswe can become stuck in local minima in algorit hm space; developmentof synthetic
dataisonewaytotryandbreakoutofthat.
In this work we proposea frameworkand a set of synthetictask s for the goal of helpingto develop
learning algorithms for text understanding and reasoning. While it is relatively difﬁcult to auto-
matically evaluate the performanceof an agent in general di alogue – a long term-goal of AI – it is
relatively easy to evaluate responses to input questions, i .e., the task of question answering (QA).
Questionansweringis incrediblybroad: moreor less anytas k onecan thinkofcan be cast into this
setup. Thisenablesustoproposeawiderangingsetofdiffer enttasks,thattestdifferentcapabilities
oflearningalgorithms,undera commonframework.
Our tasks are built with a uniﬁed underlying simulation of a p hysical world, akin to a classic text
adventuregame(Montfort,2005)wherebyactorsmovearound manipulatingobjectsandinteracting
1
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
witheachother. Asthesimulationruns,groundedtextandqu estionanswerpairsaresimultaneously
generated. Our goal is to categorize different kinds of questions into skill sets, which become our
tasks. Our hope is that the analysis of performance on these t asks will help expose weaknesses of
currentmodelsandhelpmotivatenewalgorithmdesignsthat alleviatetheseweaknesses. Wefurther
envision this as a feedback loop where new tasks can then be de signed in response, perhaps in an
adversarialfashion,inordertobreakthenewmodels.
ThetaskswedesignaredetailedinSection3,andthesimulat ionusedtogeneratetheminSection4.
InSection5wegivebenchmarkresultsofstandardmethodson ourtasks,andanalysetheirsuccesses
and failures. In order to exemplify the kind of feedback loop between algorithm development and
taskdevelopmentweenvision,inSectionAweproposeasetof improvementstotherecentMemory
Network method, which has shown to give promising performan ce in QA. We show our proposed
approachdoesindeedgiveimprovedperformanceonsometask s,butisstillunabletosolvesomeof
them,whichwe considerasopenproblems.
2 RELATEDWORK
SeveralprojectstargetinglanguageunderstandingusingQ A-basedstrategieshaverecentlyemerged.
Unlike tasks like dialogue or summarization, QA is easy to ev aluate (especially in true/false or
multiple choice scenarios) and hence makes it an appealing r esearch avenue. The difﬁculty lies in
the deﬁnitionof questions: they mustbe unambiguouslyansw erablebyadult humans(or children),
but still require some thinking. The Allen Institute for AI ’s ﬂagship project ARISTO1is organized
aroundacollectionofQAtasksderivedfromincreasinglydi fﬁcultscienceexams,atthe4th,8th,and
12thgradelevels. Richardsonetal.(2013)proposedthe MCTest2asetof660storiesandassociated
questions intended for research on the machine comprehensi on of text. Each question requires the
readertounderstanddifferentaspectsofthe story.
These two initiatives go in a promising direction but interp reting the results on these benchmarks
remaincomplicated. Indeed,nosystemhasyetbeenabletofu llysolvetheproposedtasksandsince
many sub-tasks need to be solved to answer any of their questi ons (coreference, deduction, use of
common-sense, etc.), it is difﬁcult to clearly identify cap abilities and limitations of these systems
and hence to propose improvementsand modiﬁcations. As a res ult, conclusions drawn from these
projectsare not muchclearerthanthat comingfrommoretrad itionalworksonQA overlarge-scale
KnowledgeBases(Berantet al.,2013;Faderetal.,2014). Be sides,thebestperformingsystemsare
based on hand-crafted patterns and features, and/or statis tics acquired on very large corpora. It is
difﬁculttoarguethatsuchsystemsactuallyunderstandlan guageandarenotsimplylightupgradesof
traditional information extraction methods (Yaoet al., 20 14). The system of Berantetal. (2014) is
moreevolvedsinceitbuildsastructuredrepresentationof atextandofaquestiontoanswer. Despite
itspotentialthismethodremainshighlydomainspeciﬁc and reliesonalot ofpriorknowledge.
Based on these observations, we chose to conceive a collecti on of much simpler QA tasks, with
the main objective that failure or success of a system on any o f them can unequivocally provide
feedbackonitscapabilities. Inthat,weareclosetothe WinogradSchemaChallenge Levesqueetal.
(2011), which is organized around simple statements follow ed by a single binary choice question
such as: “ Joan made sure to thank Susan for all the help she had received . Who had received the
help? Joan or Susan? ”. In this challenge, and our tasks, it is straightforward to interpret results.
Yet, where the Winograd Challenge is mostly centered around evaluating if systems can acquire
and make use of background knowledge that is not expressed in the words of the statement, our
tasks are self-contained and are more diverse. By self-cont ained we mean our tasks come with
both training data and evaluation data, rather than just the latter as in the case of ARISTOand the
Winograd Challenge. MCTesthas a train/test split but the training set is likely too smal l to capture
all the reasoning needed to do well on the test set. In our setu p one can assess the amount of
training examples needed to perform well (which can be incre ased as desired) and commonsense
knowledgeandreasoningrequiredforthetestsetshouldbec ontainedinthetrainingset. Intermsof
diversity,someofourtasksarerelatedtoexistingsetupsb utwealsoproposemanyadditionalones;
tasks8and9 areinspiredbypreviousworkonlambdadependen cy-basedcompositionalsemantics
(Lianget al.,2013;Liang,2013)forinstance. Forus,eacht askchecksoneskillthatthesystemmust
1http://allenai.org/aristo.html
2http://research.microsoft.com/mct
2
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
haveandwe postulatethatperformingwellonall ofthemisa p rerequisiteforanysystemaimingat
fulltextunderstandingandreasoning.
3 THETASKS
Principles Our main idea is to provide a set of tasks, in a similar way to ho w software testing
is built in computer science. Ideally each task is a “leaf” te st case, as independent from oth-
ers as possible, and tests in the simplest way possible one as pect of intended behavior. Subse-
quent (“non-leaf”) tests can build on these by testing combi nations as well. The tasks are pub-
licly available at http://fb.ai/babi . Source code to generate the tasks is available at
https://github.com/facebook/bAbI-tasks .
Eachtaskprovidesasetoftrainingandtestdata,withthein tentionthatasuccessfulmodelperforms
well on test data. FollowingWeston et al. (2014), the superv isionin the training set is given by the
true answers to questions, and the set of relevantstatements for answering a given question, which
may or may not be used by the learner. We set up the tasks so that correct answers are limited to a
single word ( Q: Where is Mark? A: bathroom ), or else a list of words ( Q: What is Mark holding? )
asevaluationis thenclear-cut,andismeasuredsimplyasri ghtorwrong.
All of the tasks are noiseless and a human able to read that lan guage can potentially achieve 100%
accuracy. We tried to choosetasks that are naturalto a human : theyare based onsimple usual situ-
ationsand no backgroundin areas such as formalsemantics, m achinelearning,logic or knowledge
representationisrequiredforanadulttosolvethem.
The data itself is producedusing a simple simulation of char acters and objects moving around and
interacting in locations, described in Section 4. The simul ation allows us to generate data in many
different scenarios where the true labels are known by groun dingto the simulation. For each task,
we describe it by giving a small sample of the dataset includi ng statements, questions and the true
labels(inred)inTables1and2.
Single Supporting Fact Task 1 consistsof questionswherea previouslygivensingle supporting
fact, potentiallyamongst a set of other irrelevantfacts, p rovidesthe answer. We ﬁrst test one of the
simplestcasesofthis,byaskingforthelocationofaperson ,e.g.“Marytravelledtotheofﬁce. Where
isMary?” . ThiskindoftaskwasalreadyemployedinWestonet al.(2014 ). Itcanbeconsideredthe
simplest caseofsomerealworldQA datasetssuchasinFadere t al.(2013).
TwoorThreeSupportingFacts Ahardertaskistoanswerquestionswheretwosupportingsta te-
mentshavetobechainedtoanswerthequestion,asin task2,w heretoanswerthequestion “Where
is the football?” one has to combine information from two sentences “John is in the playground”
and“Johnpickedupthefootball” . Again,thiskindoftaskwasalreadyusedinWestonet al.(20 14).
Similarly, one can make a task with three supporting facts, g iven in task 3, whereby the ﬁrst three
statementsareall requiredtoanswerthequestion“Wherewa stheapplebeforethekitchen?”.
TwoorThreeArgumentRelations Toanswerquestionstheabilitytodifferentiateandrecogn ize
subjects and objects is crucial. In task 4 we consider the ext reme case where sentences feature re-
ordered words, i.e. a bag-of-words will not work. For exampl e, the questions “What is north of
the bedroom?” and“What is the bedroom north of?” have exactly the same words, but a different
order, with different answers. A step further, sometimes on e needs to differentiate three separate
arguments. Task 5 involves statements like “Jeff was given the milk by Bill” and then queries who
isthegiver,receiverorwhichobjectisinvolved.
Yes/NoQuestions Task6tests,onsomeofthesimplestquestionspossible(spe ciﬁcally,oneswith
a single supportingfact), the ability of a model to answer tr ue/false type questions like “Is John in
theplayground?” .
Counting and Lists/Sets Task 7 tests the ability of the QA system to perform simple cou nting
operations,by asking about the numberof objects with a cert ain property,e.g. “How many objects
isDanielholding?” . Similarly,task8teststheabilitytoproduceasetofsingl ewordanswersinthe
formofa list, e.g. “WhatisDanielholding?” . ThesetaskscanbeseenasQA tasksrelatedtobasic
databasesearchoperations.
3
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
Table1: Samplestatementsandquestionsfromtasks1to10.
Task1: SingleSupportingFact Task2: TwoSupportingFacts
Mary went tothe bathroom. John isinthe playground.
John moved tothe hallway. John picked upthe football.
Mary travelledtothe ofﬁce. Bobwent tothe kitchen.
Where isMary? A:ofﬁce Where isthe football? A:playground
Task3: ThreeSupportingFacts Task4: TwoArgument Relations
John picked up the apple. The ofﬁce isnorth of the bedroom.
John went tothe ofﬁce. The bedroom is northof the bathroom.
John went tothe kitchen. The kitchen iswest of the garden.
John dropped the apple. What isnorthof the bedroom? A: ofﬁce
Where was the apple before the kitchen? A:ofﬁce What isthe bedroom north of? A: bathroom
Task5: ThreeArgument Relations Task6: Yes/NoQuestions
Mary gavethe cake toFred. John moved tothe playground.
Fredgave the cake toBill. Daniel went tothe bathroom.
Jeff was given the milkbyBill. John went back tothe hallway.
Whogave the cake toFred? A:Mary Is Johninthe playground? A:no
WhodidFredgive the cake to? A:Bill Is Daniel inthe bathroom? A:yes
Task7: Counting Task8: Lists/Sets
Daniel picked up the football. Daniel picks up the football.
Daniel dropped the football. Daniel drops the newspaper.
Daniel got the milk. Daniel picks up the milk.
Daniel took the apple. John tookthe apple.
How many objects is Daniel holding? A: two What isDaniel holding? milk,football
Task9: SimpleNegation Task10: IndeﬁniteKnowledge
Sandra travelledtothe ofﬁce. John iseither inthe classroom or the playground.
Fredisno longer inthe ofﬁce. Sandra is inthe garden.
Is Fredinthe ofﬁce? A:no Is Johninthe classroom? A:maybe
Is Sandra inthe ofﬁce? A:yes Is Johninthe ofﬁce? A:no
Simple Negation and Indeﬁnite Knowledge Tasks 9 and 10 test slightly more complex natural
languageconstructs. Task 9testsoneofthesimplest formso fnegation,thatofsupportingfactsthat
imply a statement is false e.g. “Fred is no longer in the ofﬁce” rather than “Fred travelled to the
ofﬁce”. (In this case, task 6 (yes/no questions) is a prerequisite t o the task.) Task 10 tests if we
can model statements that describe possibilities rather th an certainties, e.g. “John is either in the
classroom or the playground.” , where in that case the answer is “maybe” to the question “Is John
inthe classroom?” .
Basic Coreference, Conjunctions and Compound Coreference Task 11 tests the simplest type
of coreference,that of detectingthe nearest referent,e.g .“Daniel was in the kitchen. Then he went
to the studio.” . Real-world data typically addresses this as a labeling pro blem and studies more
sophisticated phenomena (Soonet al., 2001), whereas we eva luate it as in all our other tasks as a
question answering problem. Task 12 (conjunctions)tests r eferring to multiple subjects in a single
statement, e.g. “Mary and Jeff went to the kitchen.” . Task 13 tests coreference in the case where
thepronouncanrefertomultipleactors,e.g. “DanielandSandrajourneyedtotheofﬁce. Thenthey
went tothegarden” .
Time Reasoning While our tasks so far have included time implicitly in the orderof the state-
ments, task 14 tests understanding the use of time expressio ns within the statements, e.g. “In the
afternoon Julie went to the park. Yesterday Julie was at scho ol.”, followed by questions about the
orderofeventssuchas “WherewasJuliebeforethepark?” . Real-worlddatasetsaddressthetaskof
evaluating time expressions typically as a labeling, rathe r than a QA task, see e.g. UzZamanetal.
(2012).
Basic Deduction and Induction Task 15 tests basic deduction via inheritance of properties , e.g.
“Sheep are afraid of wolves. Gertrude is a sheep. What is Gert rude afraid of?” . Task 16 similarly
4
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
Table 2: Samplestatementsandquestionsfromtasks11to20.
Task11: Basic Coreference Task 12: Conjunction
Daniel was inthe kitchen. Mary andJeff went tothe kitchen.
Thenhe went tothe studio. Then Jeffwent tothe park.
Sandra was inthe ofﬁce. Where is Mary? A:kitchen
Where isDaniel? A:studio Where is Jeff? A:park
Task13: CompoundCoreference Task 14: Time Reasoning
Daniel and Sandra journeyed tothe ofﬁce. Inthe afternoon Julie went tothe park.
Thenthey went tothe garden. YesterdayJulie was at school.
Sandra and John travelledtothe kitchen. Julie went tothe cinema this evening.
After thattheymoved tothe hallway. Where didJulie goafter the park? A:cinema
Where isDaniel? A:garden Where was Julie before the park? A:school
Task15: Basic Deduction Task 16: Basic Induction
Sheepare afraidof wolves. Lilyisa swan.
Cats are afraidofdogs. Lilyiswhite.
Mice are afraidof cats. Bernhard is green.
Gertrude is a sheep. Gregis a swan.
What isGertrude afraidof? A:wolves What color is Greg? A:white
Task17: PositionalReasoning Task 18: Size Reasoning
The triangle is tothe right of the blue square. The football ﬁtsinthe suitcase.
The redsquare ison topof the blue square. The suitcase ﬁtsinthe cupboard.
The redsphere istothe right of the blue square. The box issmaller thanthe football.
Is the redsphere tothe right of the blue square? A:yes Willthe box ﬁtinthe suitcase? A:yes
Is the redsquare tothe left of the triangle? A:yes Willthe cupboard ﬁtinthe box? A:no
Task19: Path Finding Task 20: Agent’s Motivations
The kitchen isnorth of the hallway. John is hungry.
The bathroom is westof the bedroom. John goes tothe kitchen.
The den iseast of the hallway. John grabbed the apple there.
The ofﬁce is southof the bedroom. Daniel is hungry.
How do yougo from dentokitchen? A: west,north Where does Daniel go? A:kitchen
How do yougo from ofﬁce tobathroom? A: north, west WhydidJohn gotothe kitchen? A:hungry
tests basic induction via inheritance of properties. A full analysis of induction and deduction is
clearlybeyondthescopeofthiswork,andfuturetasksshoul danalysefurther,deeperaspects.
Positional and Size Reasoning Task 17 tests spatial reasoning, one of many components of th e
classical SHRDLU system (Winograd, 1972) by asking questio ns about the relative positions of
colored blocks. Task 18 requires reasoning about the relati ve size of objects and is inspired by the
commonsensereasoningexamplesintheWinogradschemachal lenge(Levesqueetal., 2011).
Path Finding The goal of task 19 is to ﬁnd the path between locations: given the description
of various locations, it asks: how do you get from one to anoth er? This is related to the work of
Chen&Mooney(2011) andeffectivelyinvolvesasearchprobl em.
Agent’s Motivations Finally, task 20 questions, in the simplest way possible, whyan agent per-
formsanaction. Itaddressesthecaseofactorsbeingina giv enstate (hungry,thirsty,tired,...) and
theactionstheythentake,e.g. itshouldlearnthathungryp eoplemightgotothekitchen,andsoon.
As already stated, these tasks are meant to foster the develo pment and understanding of machine
learning algorithms. A single model should be evaluated acr oss all the tasks (not tuning per task)
andthenthe samemodelshouldbe testedonadditionalreal-w orldtasks.
In our data release, in addition to providing the above 20 tas ks in English, we also provide them
(i) in Hindi; and (ii) with shufﬂed English words so they are n o longer readable by humans. A
good learning algorithm should perform similarly on all thr ee, which would likely not be the case
for a method using external resources, a setting intended to mimic a learner being ﬁrst presented a
languageandhavingto learnfromscratch.
5
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
4 SIMULATION
All our tasks are generated with a simulation which behaves l ike a classic text adventure game.
The idea is that generating text within this simulation allo ws us to ground the language used into
a coherent and controlled (artiﬁcial) world. Our simulatio n follows those of Bordeset al. (2010);
Weston etal. (2014)butissomewhatmorecomplex.
The simulated world is composedof entities of varioustypes (locations,objects, persons. etc.) and
ofvariousactionsthatoperateontheseentities. Entities haveinternalstates: theirlocation,whether
they carry objects on top or inside them (e.g., tables and box es), the mental state of actors (e.g.
hungry),aswell aspropertiessuchassize,color,andedibi lity. Forlocations,the nearbyplacesthat
are connected (e.g. what lies to the east, or above) are encod ed. For actors, a set of pre-speciﬁed
rulesperactorcanalsobespeciﬁedtocontroltheirbehavio r,e.g. iftheyarehungrytheymaytryto
ﬁndfood. Randomvalidactionscanalsobeexecutedifnorule isset,e.g. walkingaroundrandomly.
The actions an actor can execute in the simulation consist of the following: go<location>,get
<object>,get<object1>from<object2>,put<object1>in/on<object2>,give<object>to
<actor>,drop<object>,set<entitity> <state>,look,inventory andexamine<object>. A set
of universal constraints is imposed on those actions to enfo rce coherence in the simulation. For
example an actor cannot get something that they or someone el se already has, they cannot go to a
place that isnot connectedto the currentlocation,cannotd ropsomethingthey donot alreadyhave,
and so on. Using the underlying actions, rules for actors, an d their constraints, deﬁnes how actors
act. Foreachtaskwe limittheactionsneededforthattask,e .g. task1onlyneeds gowhereastask2
usesgo,getanddrop. If we write the commandsdownthis givesus a verysimple “sto ry” which is
executablebythesimulation,e.g., joegoplayground;bobgoofﬁce;joeget football . Thisexample
corresponds to task 2. The system can then ask questions abou t the state of the simulation e.g.,
where john? ,where football? and so on. It is easy to calculate the true answers for these qu estions
aswehaveaccesstotheunderlyingworld.
Toproducemorenaturallookingtextwithlexicalvarietyfr omstatementsandquestionsweemploya
simpleautomatedgrammar. Eachverbisassignedasetofsyno nyms,e.g.,thesimulationcommand
getisreplacedwitheither pickedup ,got,grabbedortook,anddropisreplacedwitheither dropped,
left,discarded orputdown. Similarly,eachobjectandactorcanhaveasetofreplaceme ntsynonyms
aswell,e.g. replacingDanielwith heintask11. Adverbsarecrucialforsometaskssuchasthetime
reasoningtask14.
There are a great many aspects of language not yet modeled. Fo r example, all sentences are so far
relativelyshort and containlittle nesting. Further,the e ntities and the vocabularysize is small (150
words,andtypically4actors,6locationsand3objectsused pertask). Thehopeisthatdeﬁningaset
ofwelldeﬁnedtaskswillhelpevaluatemodelsinacontrolle dwaywithinthesimulatedenvironment,
which is hard to do with real data. That is, these tasks are not a substitute for real data, but should
complementthem,especiallywhendevelopingandanalysing algorithms.
5 EXPERIMENTS
We compared the following methods on our tasks (on the Englis h dataset): (i) an N-
gram classiﬁer baseline, (ii) LSTMs (long short term memory Recurrent Neural Networks)
(Hochreiter& Schmidhuber, 1997), (iii) Memory Networks (M emNNs) (Westonet al., 2014), (iv)
some extensions of Memory Networks we will detail; and (v) a s tructured SVM that incorporates
externallabeleddatafromexistingNLPtasks. Thesemodels belongtothreeseparatetracks. Weakly
supervisedmodelsareonlygivenquestionanswerpairsattr ainingtime,whereasstrongsupervision
provides the set of supporting facts at training time (but no t testing time) as well. Strongly super-
vised ones give accuracy upper boundsfor weakly supervised models, i.e. the performanceshould
besuperiorgiventhesamemodelclass. Methodsinthelastex ternalresourcestrackcanuselabeled
datafromothersourcesratherthanjustthetrainingsetpro vided,e.g. coreferenceandsemanticrole
labeling tasks, as well as strong supervision. For each task we use 1000questions for training, and
1000 for testing, and report the test accuracy. We consider a task successfully passed if ≥95%
accuracyis obtained3.
3The choice of 95% (and1000 trainingexamples) isarbitrary.
6
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
Table3: Testaccuracy(%)onour 20Tasksforvarious methods (1000tr ainingexamples each). Ourproposed
extensions toMemNNs are incolumns 5-9: with adaptive memor y (AM),N-grams (NG),nonlinear matching
function (NL), and combinations thereof. Bold numbers indi cate tasks where our extensions achieve ≥95%
accuracy but the original MemNN model of Westonet al. (2014) did not. The last two columns (10-11) give
extra analysis of the MemNN
AM +NG +NLmethod. Column 10 gives the amount of training data for each t ask needed to
obtain≥95%accuracy, or FAILif this is not achievable with1000 training examples. The ﬁn al column gives
the accuracy when trainingonalldata atonce, rather thanse parately.
Weakly UsesExternal StrongSupervision
Supervised Resources (usingsupportingfacts)
TASK N-gramClassiﬁerLSTMStructuredSVMCOREF+SRL featuresMemNN
Weston etal. (2014)MemNN
ADAPTIVE MEMORYMemNN
AM +N-GRAMSMemNN
AM +NONLINEARMemNNAM +NG +NLNo. ofex. req.≥95
MultiTask Training
1-SingleSupportingFact 3650 99 100 100 100 100100250ex.100
2-Two SupportingFacts 220 74 100 100 100 100100500ex.100
3-ThreeSupportingFacts 720 17 20 100 99100100500ex.98
4-Two Arg. Relations 5061 98 71 69100 73100500ex.80
5-ThreeArg. Relations 2070 83 83 83 86 86981000 ex.99
6-Yes/NoQuestions 4948 99 47 52 53100100500ex.100
7-Counting 5249 69 68 78 86 8385FAIL 86
8-Lists/Sets 4045 70 77 90 88 9491FAIL 93
9-SimpleNegation 6264 100 65 71 63100100500ex.100
10- IndeﬁniteKnowledge 4544 99 59 57 54 97981000 ex.98
11- Basic Coreference 2972 100 100 100 100 100100250ex.100
12- Conjunction 974 96 100 100 100 100100250ex.100
13- CompoundCoref. 2694 99 100 100 100 100100250ex.100
14- TimeReasoning 1927 99 99 100 99100 99500ex.99
15- Basic Deduction 2021 96 74 73100 77100100ex.100
16- Basic Induction 4323 24 27 100 100 100100100ex.94
17- PositionalReasoning 4651 61 54 46 49 5765FAIL 72
18- SizeReasoning 5252 62 57 50 74 54951000 ex.93
19- PathFinding 08 49 0 9 31536FAIL 19
20- Agent’sMotivations 7691 95 100 100 100 100100250ex.100
MeanPerformance 3449 79 75 79 83 8793 10092
Methods TheN-gram classiﬁer baseline is inspired by the baselines in Ric hardsonetal. (2013)
but applied to the case of producing a 1-word answer rather th an a multiple choice question: we
construct a bag-of- N-grams for all sentences in the story that share at least one w ord with the
question,andthenlearna linearclassiﬁer to predictthean swerusingthosefeatures4.
LSTMs are a popularmethodfor sequenceprediction(Sutskev eret al., 2014) and outperformstan-
dardRNNs (RecurrentNeuralNetworks)fortaskssimilar to o urs(Weston etal., 2014). Theywork
byreadingthestoryuntilthepointtheyreachaquestionand thenhavetooutputananswer. Notethat
they are weakly supervised by answers only, and are hence at a disadvantagecompared to strongly
supervisedmethodsormethodsthatuse externalresources.
MemNNs (Weston et al., 2014) are a recently proposed class of models that have been shown to
perform well at QA. They work by a “controller” neural networ k performing inference over the
stored memories that consist of the previous statements in t he story. The original proposed model
performs 2 hopsof inference: ﬁndingthe ﬁrst supportingfact with the maxim ummatch score with
the question, and then the second supporting fact with the ma ximum match score with both the
question and the ﬁrst fact that was found. The matching funct ion consists of mapping the bag-of-
wordsforthequestionandfactsintoanembeddingspacebysu mmingwordembeddings. Theword
embeddings are learnt using strong supervision to optimize the QA task. After ﬁnding supporting
facts, a ﬁnal rankingis performedto rank possible response s(answer words) given those facts. We
also considersomeextensionstothismodel:
•Adaptive memories performing a variable number of hops rather than 2, the model is
trainedtopredictahoporthespecial“STOP”class. Asimila rprocedurecanbeappliedto
outputmultipletokensaswell.
4Constructing N-grams from allsentences rather thanusing the ﬁlteredset g ave worse results.
7
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
•N-gramsWe triedusingabagof3-gramsratherthanabag-of-wordstor epresentthetext.
Inbothcasestheﬁrst step oftheMemNNistoconvertthese int ovectorialembeddings.
•Nonlinearity We apply a classical 2-layer neural network with tanh nonlin earity in the
matchingfunction.
MoredetailsofthesevariantsisgiveninSec A oftheappendi x.
Finally, we built a classical cascade NLP system baseline us ing a structured support vector ma-
chine (SVM), which incorporates coreference resolution an d semantic role labeling (SRL) prepro-
cessing steps, which are themselves trained on large amount s of costly labeled data. The Stanford
coreferencesystem(Raghunathanetal.,2010)andtheSENNA semanticrolelabeling(SRL)system
(Collobertet al.,2011)areusedtobuildfeaturesforthein puttotheSVM,trainedwithstrongsuper-
vision to ﬁnd the supportingfacts, e.g. features based on wo rds, word pairs, and the SRL verb and
verb-argumentpairs. After ﬁnding the supporting facts, we build a similar structured SVM for the
responsestage,withfeaturestunedforthatgoalaswell. Mo redetailsareinSec. Boftheappendix.
Learning rates and other hyperparameters for all methods ar e chosen using the training set. The
summaryofourexperimentalresultsonthetasksisgiveninT able3. Wegiveresultsforeachofthe
20tasksseparately,aswell asmeanperformanceandnumbero ffailedtasksin theﬁnaltwo rows.
Results StandardMemNNsgenerallyoutperformthe N-gramandLSTMbaselines,whichiscon-
sistent with the results in Westonet al.(2014). However the y still “fail” at a number of tasks; that
is, test accuracy is less than 95%. Some of these failures are expecteddue to insufﬁcient modeling
power as described in more detail in Sec. A.1, e.g. k= 2facts, single word answers and bag-of-
wordsdonotsucceedontasks3,4,5,7,8and18. However,ther ewerealsofailuresontaskswedid
notatﬁrstexpect,forexampleyes/noquestions(6)andinde ﬁniteknowledge(10). Givenhindsight,
we realize that the linear scoring function of standard MemN Ns cannot model the match between
query,supportingfactanda yes/noanswerasthisrequirest hree-wayinteractions.
Columns 5-9 of Table 3 give the results for our MemNN extensio ns: adaptive memories (AM),
N-grams (NG) and nonlinearities (NL), plus combinationsthe reof. The adaptive approach gives a
straight-forwardimprovementintasks3 and16 becausethey bothrequiremorethantwosupporting
facts,andalsogives(small)improvementsin8 and19becaus etheyrequiremulti-wordoutputs(but
still remain difﬁcult). We hence use the AM model in combinat ionwith all our other extensionsin
thesubsequentexperiments.
MemNNs with N-gram modeling yield clear improvements when word order mat ters, e.g. tasks
4 and 15. However, N-grams do not seem to be a substitute for nonlinearities in th e embedding
functionas the NL model outperforms N-gramson average, especially in the yes/no (6) and indef-
inite tasks (10), as explained before. On the other hand, the NL method cannot model word order
and so fails e.g., on task 4. The obvious step is thus to combin e these complimentary approaches:
indeed AM+NG+NL (column 9) gives improvedresults over both , with a total of 9 tasks that have
beenupgradedfromfailuretosuccesscomparedtothe origin alMemNNmodel.
The structuredSVM, despite havingaccess to externalresou rces, doesnot performbetter, still fail-
ing at 9 tasks. It does perform better than vanilla MemNNs (wi thout extensions) on tasks 6, 9 and
10 where the hand-built feature conjunctions capture the ne cessary nonlinearities. However, com-
pared to MemNN (AM+NG+NL) it seems to do signiﬁcantly worse o n tasks requiring three (and
sometimes,two)supportingfacts(e.g. tasks3,16and2)pre sumablyasrankingoversomanypossi-
bilitiesintroducesmoremistakes. However,itsnon-greed ysearchdoesseemtohelponothertasks,
such as path ﬁnding (task 19) where search is very important. Since it relies on external resources
speciﬁcally designedfor English,it is unsurethat it would performaswell on otherlanguages,like
Hindi,wheresuchexternalresourcesmightbeofworsequali ty.
The ﬁnal two columns (10-11) give further analysis of the AM+ NG+NL MemNN method. The
secondto last column(10)showsthe minimumnumberof traini ngexamplesrequiredto achieve ≥
95%accuracy,or FAILifthisisnotachievedwith1000examples. Thisisimportant asitisnotonly
desirable to perform well on a task, but also using the fewest number of examples (to generalize
well, quickly). Most succeeding tasks require 100-500 exam ples. Task 8 requires 5000 examples
and 7 requires10000,hence theyare labeled as FAIL. The latter task can presumablybe solved by
adding all the times an object is picked up, and subtracting t he times it is dropped, which seems
8
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
possible for an MemNN, but it does not do perfectly. Two tasks , positional reasoning 17 and path
ﬁnding19 cannotbe solved evenwith 10000examples,it seems those (andindeedmore advanced
formsof inductionand deduction,which we plan to build) req uirea generalsearch algorithmto be
builtintotheinferenceprocedure,whichMemNN(andthe oth erapproachestried)arelacking.
The last column shows the performance of AM+NG+NL MemNNs whe n training on allthe tasks
jointly,ratherthanjustonasingleone. Theperformanceis generallyencouraginglysimilar,showing
suchamodelcanlearnmanyaspectsoftextunderstandingand reasoningsimultaneously. Themain
issuesarethatthesemodelsstillfailonseveralofthetask s,anduseafarstrongerformofsupervision
(usingsupportingfacts) thanistypicallyrealistic.
6 DISCUSSION
A prerequisite set We developeda set of tasks that we believe are a prerequisite to full language
understanding and reasoning. While any learner that can sol ve these tasks is not necessarily close
to full reasoning, if a learner fails on any of our tasks then t here are likely real-world tasks that it
will failontoo(i.e.,real-worldtasksthatrequirethesam ekindofreasoning). Evenifthesituations
andthelanguageofthetasksareartiﬁcial,we believethatt hemechanismsrequiredto learnhowto
solvethemarepartofthe keytowardstextunderstandingand reasoning.
A ﬂexible framework This set of tasks is not a deﬁnitive set. The purpose of a simul ation-based
approachis to provideﬂexibility andcontrolof the tasks’ c onstruction. We groundedthe tasks into
language because it is then easier to understand the usefuln ess of the tasks and to interpret their
results. However, our primary goal is to ﬁnd models able to le arn to detect and combine patterns
in symbolic sequences. One might even want to decrease the in trinsic difﬁculty by removing any
lexical variability and ambiguity and reason only over bare symbols, stripped down from their lin-
guistic meaning. One could also decorrelatethe long-termm emoryfrom the reasoningcapabilities
of systems by, for instance, arranging the supporting facts closer to the questions. In the opposing
view, one could instead want to transform the tasks into more realistic stories using annotators or
more complex grammars. The set of 20 tasks presented here is a subset of what can be achieved
with a simulation. We chose them because they offer a variety of skills that we would like a text
reasoning model to have, but we hope researchers from the com munity will develop more tasks of
varyingcomplexityinordertodevelopandanalyzemodelsth attrytosolvethem. Transferlearning
across tasks is also a very important goal, beyond the scope o f this paper. We have thus made the
simulatorandcodeforthetaskspubliclyavailableforthos epurposes.
Testing learningmethods Our tasksare designedasa test-bedforlearningmethods: we provide
training and test sets because we intend to evaluate the capa bility of models to discover how to
reason from patterns hidden within them. It could be temptin g to hand-code solutions for them or
touseexistinglarge-scaleQAsystemslikeCyc(Curtiset al .,2005). Theymightsucceedat solving
them, even if our structured SVM results (a cascaded NLP syst em with hand-built features) show
thatthisis notstraightforward;howeverthisisnotthe tas ks’purposesince thoseapproacheswould
not be learningto solve them. Our experimentsshow that some existingmachine learningmethods
aresuccessfulonsomeofthetasks,inparticularMemoryNet works,forwhichweintroducedsome
useful extensions(in Sec. A). However,those modelsstill f ail on several of the tasks, and use a far
strongerformofsupervision(usingsupportingfacts)than istypicallyrealistic.
These datasets are not yet solved. Future research should ai m to minimize the amount of required
supervision,as well as the numberof trainingexamplesneed edto solve a new task, to movecloser
to the task transfer capabilities of humans. That is, in the w eakly supervised case with only 1000
training examples or less there is no known general (i.e. non -hand engineered) method that solves
the tasks. Further, importantly, our hope is that a feedback loop of developing more challenging
tasks, andthenalgorithmsthatcansolvethem,leadsusto fr uitfulresearchdirections.
Notethatthesetasksarenotasubstituteforrealdata,buts houldcomplementthem,especiallywhen
developing and analysing algorithms. There are many comple mentary real-world datasets, see for
example Hermannet al. (2015); Bordeset al. (2015); Hill et a l. (2015). That is, even if a method
workswell onour20tasks,it shouldbeshowntobeusefulonre aldataaswell.
9
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
Impact Since being online, the bAbI tasks have already directly inﬂ uenced the development
of several promising new algorithms, including weakly supe rvised end-to-end Memory Networks
(MemN2N) of Sukhbaataret al. (2015), Dynamic Memory Networ ks of Kumaret al. (2015), and
the Neural Reasoner (Penget al., 2015). MemN2N has since bee n shown to performwell on some
real-worldtasks(Hillet al., 2015).
REFERENCES
Bache, K. and Lichman, M. UCI machine learning repository, 2 013. URL
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml .
Berant,Jonathan,Chou,Andrew,Frostig,Roy,andLiang,Pe rcy. Semanticparsingonfreebasefrom
question-answerpairs. In EMNLP, pp.1533–1544,2013.
Berant, Jonathan, Srikumar, Vivek, Chen, Pei-Chun, Huang, Brad, Manning, Christopher D, Van-
derLinden,Abby,Harding,Brittany,andClark,Peter. Mode lingbiologicalprocessesforreading
comprehension. In Proc.EMNLP , 2014.
Bordes, Antoine, Usunier, Nicolas, Collobert, Ronan, and W eston, Jason. Towards understanding
situatednaturallanguage. In AISTATS,2010.
Bordes,Antoine,Usunier,Nicolas,Chopra,Sumit,andWest on, Jason. Large-scalesimplequestion
answeringwithmemorynetworks. arXivpreprintarXiv:1506.02075 ,2015.
Chen,David L andMooney,RaymondJ. Learningto interpretna turallanguagenavigationinstruc-
tionsfromobservations. SanFrancisco,CA , pp.859–865,2011.
Collobert,Ronan, Weston, Jason, Bottou, L´ eon,Karlen,Mi chael, Kavukcuoglu,Koray,andKuksa,
Pavel. Natural language processing (almost) from scratch. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research,12:2493–2537,2011.
Curtis,Jon,Matthews,Gavin,andBaxter,David. Ontheeffe ctiveuseofcycinaquestionanswering
system. In IJCAI Workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning for Answering Que stions, pp. 61–70,
2005.
Fader,Anthony,Zettlemoyer,Luke,andEtzioni,Oren. Para phrase-drivenlearningforopenquestion
answering. In ACL,pp.1608–1618,2013.
Fader, Anthony, Zettlemoyer, Luke, and Etzioni, Oren. Open question answering over curated and
extracted knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conferenc e
onKnowledgediscoveryanddatamining ,pp.1156–1165.ACM,2014.
Graves, Alex, Wayne, Greg, and Danihelka, Ivo. Neural turin g machines. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1410.5401 ,2014.
Halevy,Alon,Norvig,Peter,andPereira,Fernando. Theunr easonableeffectivenessofdata. Intelli-
gentSystems,IEEE ,24(2):8–12,2009.
Hermann, Karl Moritz, Koˇ cisk´ y, Tom´ aˇ s, Grefenstette, E dward, Espeholt, Lasse, Kay, Will,
Suleyman, Mustafa, and Blunsom, Phil. Teaching machines to read and compre-
hend. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2015. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.03340 .
Hill, Felix,Bordes,Antoine,Chopra,Sumit,andWeston, Ja son. Thegoldilocksprinciple: Reading
children’sbookswith explicitmemoryrepresentations. arXivpreprintarXiv:1511.02301 ,2015.
Hochreiter, Sepp and Schmidhuber, J¨ urgen. Long short-ter m memory. Neural computation , 9(8):
1735–1780,1997.
Kumar, Ankit, Irsoy, Ozan, Su, Jonathan, Bradbury, James, E nglish, Robert, Pierce, ˜Brian, On-
druska, Peter, Gulrajani, Ishaan, and Socher, Richard. Ask me anything: Dynamic memory net-
worksfornaturallanguageprocessing. http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.07285 ,2015.
10
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
Levesque, Hector J, Davis, Ernest, and Morgenstern, Leora. The winograd schema challenge. In
AAAISpringSymposium: LogicalFormalizationsof Commonse nseReasoning ,2011.
Liang,Percy.Lambdadependency-basedcompositionalsema ntics.arXivpreprintarXiv:1309.4408 ,
2013.
Liang,Percy,Jordan,MichaelI,andKlein,Dan. Learningde pendency-basedcompositionalseman-
tics.ComputationalLinguistics ,39(2):389–446,2013.
Minsky,MarvinandPapert,Seymour. Perceptron: anintrodu ctionto computationalgeometry. The
MIT Press, Cambridge,expandededition ,19:88,1969.
Montfort,Nick. Twisty Little Passages: anapproachtointeractiveﬁction . Mit Press,2005.
M¨ uller, K-R, Smola, Alex J, R¨ atsch, Gunnar,Sch¨ olkopf,B ernhard,Kohlmorgen,Jens, and Vapnik,
Vladimir. Predicting time series with support vector machi nes. InArtiﬁcial Neural NetworksI-
CANN’97 ,pp.999–1004.Springer,1997.
Ng, Andrew Y, Jordan, Michael I, Weiss, Yair, et al. On spectr al clustering: Analysis and an algo-
rithm.Advancesin neuralinformationprocessingsystems , 2:849–856,2002.
Peng, Baolin, Lu, Zhengdong,Li, Hang, and Wong, Kam-Fai. To wards neural network-based rea-
soning.arXivpreprintarXiv:1508.05508 ,2015.
Raghunathan, Karthik, Lee, Heeyoung, Rangarajan, Sudarsh an, Chambers, Nathanael, Surdeanu,
Mihai, Jurafsky, Dan, and Manning, Christopher. A multi-pa ss sieve for coreference resolution.
InProceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in N atural Language Processing ,
pp.492–501.AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2 010.
Richardson,Matthew, Burges,ChristopherJC, and Renshaw, Erin. Mctest: A challengedataset for
theopen-domainmachinecomprehensionoftext. In EMNLP, pp.193–203,2013.
Rumelhart,DavidE,Hinton,GeoffreyE,andWilliams,Ronal dJ. Learninginternalrepresentations
byerrorpropagation. Technicalreport,DTICDocument,198 5.
Soon, Wee Meng, Ng, Hwee Tou, and Lim, Daniel Chung Yong. A mac hine learning approach to
coreferenceresolutionofnounphrases. Computationallinguistics ,27(4):521–544,2001.
Sukhbaatar, Sainbayar, Szlam, Arthur, Weston, Jason, and F ergus, Rob. End-to-end memory net-
works.ProceedingsofNIPS ,2015.
Sutskever, Ilya, Vinyals, Oriol, and Le, Quoc VV. Sequence t o sequence learning with neural net-
works. In AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems , pp.3104–3112,2014.
UzZaman, Naushad,Llorens, Hector, Allen, James, Derczyns ki, Leon,Verhagen,Marc, and Puste-
jovsky, James. Tempeval-3: Evaluating events, time expres sions, and temporal relations. arXiv
preprintarXiv:1206.5333 ,2012.
Weston, Jason, Chopra, Sumit, and Bordes, Antoine. Memory n etworks. CoRR, abs/1410.3916,
2014.
Winograd,Terry. Understandingnaturallanguage. Cognitivepsychology ,3(1):1–191,1972.
Yao,Xuchen,Berant, Jonathan,and VanDurme,Benjamin. Fre ebase qa: Informationextractionor
semanticparsing? ACL 2014 ,pp. 82,2014.
Yu, Mo, Gormley,Matthew R, and Dredze, Mark. Factor-basedc ompositional embeddingmodels.
NIPS2014workshoponLearningSemantics ,2014.
Zhu, Xiaojin, Ghahramani, Zoubin, Lafferty, John, et al. Se mi-supervised learning using gaussian
ﬁeldsandharmonicfunctions. In ICML, volume3,pp.912–919,2003.
11
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
A EXTENSIONS TO MEMORYNETWORKS
Memory Networks Weston et al. (2014) are a promising class of models, shown to perform well at
QA, that we can apply to our tasks. They consist of a memory m(an array of objects indexed by
mi) andfourpotentiallylearnablecomponents I,G,OandRthatareexecutedgivenaninput:
I: (inputfeaturemap)–convertinputsentence xto aninternalfeaturerepresentation I(x).
G: (generalization) – update the current memory state mgiven the new input: mi=
G(mi,I(x),m),∀i.
O: (output feature map) – compute output ogiven the new input and the memory: o=
O(I(x),m).
R: (response)– ﬁnally, decode output features oto give the ﬁnal textual response to the user:
r=R(o).
Potentially, component Ican make use of standard pre-processing, e.g., parsing and e ntity resolu-
tion, but the simplest form is to do no processing at all. The s implest form of Gis store the new
incomingexamplein an emptymemoryslot, and leave the rest o f the memoryuntouched. Thus, in
Weston etal. (2014) the actual implementation used is exact ly this simple form, where the bulk of
the work is in the OandRcomponents. The former is responsible for reading from memo ry and
performinginference,e.g.,calculatingwhataretherelev antmemoriestoansweraquestion,andthe
latterforproducingthe actualwordingoftheanswergiven O.
TheOmoduleproducesoutputfeaturesbyﬁnding ksupportingmemoriesgiven x. Theyuse k= 2.
Fork= 1thehighestscoringsupportingmemoryisretrievedwith:
o1=O1(x,m) = argmax
i=1,...,NsO(x,mi) (1)
wheresOis a function that scores the match between the pair of senten cesxandmi. For the case
k= 2theythenﬁnda secondsupportingmemorygiventheﬁrst found inthepreviousiteration:
o2=O2(q,m) = argmax
i=1,...,NsO([x,mo1],mi) (2)
wherethecandidatesupportingmemory miisnowscoredwithrespecttoboththeoriginalinputand
theﬁrstsupportingmemory,wheresquarebracketsdenoteal ist. Theﬁnaloutput ois[x,mo1,mo2],
whichisinputto themodule R.
Finally,Rneedsto producea textualresponse r. While the authorsalso considerRecurrentNeural
Networks (RNNs), their standard setup limits responses to b e a single word (out of all the words
seenbythemodel)byrankingthem:
r=R(q,w) =argmaxw∈WsR([x,mo1,mo2],w) (3)
whereWisthe set ofallwordsinthe dictionary,and sRisa functionthat scoresthematch.
Thescoringfunctions sOandsRhavethesame form,thatofanembeddingmodel:
s(x,y) = Φx(x)⊤U⊤UΦy(y). (4)
whereUis an×Dmatrix where Dis the number of features and nis the embeddingdimension.
The role of ΦxandΦyis to map the originaltext to the D-dimensionalfeaturespace. Theychoose
a bag of words representation, and D= 3|W|forsO, i.e., every word in the dictionary has three
different representations: one for Φy(.)and two for Φx(.)depending on whether the words of the
input arguments are from the actual input xor from the supporting memories so that they can be
modeleddifferently.
They consider various extensions of their model, in particu lar modeling write time and modeling
unseen words. Here we only discuss the former which we also us e. In orderfor the model to work
on QA tasks over stories it needs to know which order the sente nces were uttered which is not
available in the model directly. They thus add extra write ti me extra features to SOwhich take on
thevalue0or1indicatingwhichsentenceisolderthananoth erbeingcompared,andcomparetriples
of pairs of sentences and the question itself. Training is ca rried out by stochastic gradient descent
using supervision from both the question answer pairs and th e supporting memories (to select o1
ando2). See Weston etal. (2014) formoredetails.
12
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
A.1 S HORTCOMINGS OF THE EXISTING MEMNNS
TheMemoryNetworksmodelsdeﬁnedin(Westonet al.,2014)ar eonepossibletechniquetotryon
ourtasks, howeverthereareseveraltaskswhichtheyare lik elytofail on:
•They model sentences with a bag of words so are likely to fail o n tasks such as the 2-
argument(task4)and3-argument(task 5)relationproblems .
•Theyperformonly two max operations( k= 2) so they cannothandlequestionsinvolving
morethantwosupportingfactssuchastasks3and7.
•Unless a RNN is employed in the R module, they are unable to pro vide multiple answers
in the standard setting using eq. (3). This is required for th e list (8) and path ﬁnding (19)
tasks.
We thereforeproposeimprovementstotheirmodelin thefoll owingsection.
A.2 I MPROVING MEMORYNETWORKS
A.2.1 A DAPTIVE MEMORIES (ANDRESPONSES )
We consider a variable number of supporting facts that is aut omatically adapted dependent on the
questionbeingasked. To do thiswe considerscoringa specia l factm∅. Computationof supporting
memoriesthenbecomes:
i= 1
oi=O(x,m)
whileoi/negationslash=m∅do
i←i+1
oi=O([x,mo1,...,m oi−1],m)
endwhile
That is, we keep predicting supporting facts i, conditioning at each step on the previously found
facts,until m∅ispredictedatwhichpointwestop. m∅hasitsownuniqueembeddingvector,which
is also learned. In practice we still impose a hard maximumnu mberof loopsin our experimentsto
avoidfailcaseswherethecomputationneverstops(inourex perimentswe usea limitof10).
MultipleAnswers Weuseasimilartrickfortheresponsemoduleaswellinorder tooutputmulti-
plewords. Thatis,weaddaspecialword w∅tothedictionaryandpredictword wioneachiteration
iconditional on the previous words, i.e., wi=R([x,mo1,...,m |o|,wi,...,w i−1],w), until we
predictw∅.
A.2.2 N ONLINEAR SENTENCE MODELING
Thereareseveralwaysofmodelingsentencesthatgobeyonda bag-of-words,andwe explorethree
variantshere. Thesimplest isabag-of- N-grams,weconsider N= 1,2and3inthebag. Themain
disadvantage of such a method is that the dictionary grows ra pidly with N. We therefore consider
an alternativeneuralnetworkapproach,which we call a multilinear map. Eachword in a sentence
is binnedintoone of Pszpositionswith p(i,l) =⌈(iPsz)/l)⌉whereiis the positionof the wordin
a sentence of length l, and for each position we employ a n×nmatrixPp(i,l). We then model the
matchingscorewith:
s(q,d) =E(q)·E(d);E(x) =tanh(/summationdisplay
i=1,...,lPp(i,l)Φx(xi)⊤U) (5)
whereby we apply a linear map for each word dependent on its po sition, followed by a tanhnon-
linearity on the sum of mappings. Note that this is related to the model of (Yuet al., 2014) who
considertagsratherthanpositions. Whiletheresultsofth ismethodarenotshowninthemainpaper
due to space restrictions, it performssimilarly well to N-gramsto and may be useful in real-world
cases where N-grams cause the dictionary to be too large. Comparing to Tab le 3 MemNN with
adaptive memories (AM) + multilinear obtains a mean perform ance of 93, the same as MemNNs
withAM+NG+NL(i.e.,usingN-gramsinstead).
13
Underreviewasaconferencepaperat ICLR2016
Finally, to assess the performanceof nonlinearmapsthat do not modelword positionat all we also
considerthefollowing nonlinear embedding:
E(x) =tanh(Wtanh(Φx(x)⊤U)). (6)
whereWis an×nmatrix. This is similar to a classical two-layer neural netw ork, but applied to
bothsides qanddofs(q,d). Wealsoconsiderthestraight-forwardcombinationofbag- of-N-grams
followedbythisnonlinearity.
B BASELINE USING EXTERNAL RESOURCES
We also built a classical cascade NLP system baseline using a structured SVM, which incorpo-
rates coreference resolution and semantic role labeling pr eprocessing steps, which are themselves
trained on large amounts of costly labeled data. We ﬁrst run t he Stanford coreference system
(Raghunathanetal.,2010)onthestoriesandeachmentionis thenreplacedwiththeﬁrstmentionof
its entity class. Second,the SENNA semantic rolelabelings ystem (SRL) (Collobertetal., 2011) is
run,andwecollecttheset ofargumentsforeachverb. We then deﬁnearankingtaskforﬁndingthe
supportingfacts(trainedusingstrongsupervision):
o1,o2,o3= argmax
o∈OSO(x,fo1,fo2,fo3;Θ)
where given the question xwe ﬁnd at most three supporting facts with indices oifrom the set
of factsfin the story (we also consider selecting an “empty fact” for t he case of less than
three), and SOis a linear scoring function with parameters Θ. Computing the argmax requires
doing exhaustive search, unlike e.g. the MemNN method which is greedy. For scalability, we
thus prune the set of possible matches by requiring that fact s share one common non-determiner
word with each other match or with x.SOis constructed as a set of indicator features. For
simplicity each of the features only looks at pairs of senten ces, i.e. SO(x,fo1,fo2,fo3;Θ) =
Θ∗(g(x,fo1),g(x,fo2),g(x,fo3),g(fo1,fo2),g(fo2,fo3), g(fo1,fo3)). The feature function gis
made up of the following feature types, shown here for g(fo1,fo2): (1) Word pairs: One indicator
variablefor each pair of wordsin fo1andfo2. (2) Pair distance: Indicatorfor the distance between
the sentence, i.e. o1−o2. (3) Pair order: Indicator for the order of the sentence, i.e .o1> o2. (4)
SRL Verb Pair: Indicator variables for each pair of SRL verbs info1andfo2. (5) SRL Verb-Arg
Pair: Indicatorvariables for each pair of SRL argumentsin fo1,fo2and their correspondingverbs.
After ﬁnding the supporting facts, we build a similar struct ured SVM for the response stage, also
with features tuned for that goal: Words – indicator for each word inx, Word Pairs – indicator for
eachpairofwordsin xandsupportingfacts,andsimilarSRLVerbandSRLVerb-ArgP airfeatures
asbefore.
ResultsaregiveninTable3. ThestructuredSVM,despitehav ingaccesstoexternalresources,does
not perform better than MemNNs overall, still failing at 9 ta sks. It does perform well on tasks
6, 9 and 10where the hand-built feature conjunctions captur e the necessary nonlinearities that the
original MemNNs do not. However, it seems to do signiﬁcantly worse on tasks requiring three
(andsometimes, two) supportingfacts(e.g. tasks 3, 16 and 2 )presumablyas rankingoverso many
possibilities introducesmore mistakes. However,its non- greedysearch does seem to help on other
tasks, suchaspathﬁnding(task19)wheresearchisveryimpo rtant.
14