Title: Pre-Trained Language Models for Interactive Decision-Making

Pre-Trained Language Models for
Interactive Decision-Making
Shuang Li1, Xavier Puig1, Chris Paxton2, Yilun Du1, Clinton Wang1, Linxi Fan2,
Tao Chen1, De-An Huang2, Ekin Akyürek1, Anima Anandkumar2,3,†,
Jacob Andreas1,†, Igor Mordatch4,†, Antonio Torralba1,†, Yuke Zhu2,5,†
1MIT,2Nvidia,3Caltech,4Google Brain,5UT Austin
Junior authors are ordered based on contributions and senior authors†are ordered alphabetically.
Abstract
Language model (LM) pre-training is useful in many language processing tasks.
But can pre-trained LMs be further leveraged for more general machine learn-
ing problems? We propose an approach for using LMs to scaffold learning and
generalization in general sequential decision-making problems. In this approach,
goals and observations are represented as a sequence of embeddings, and a policy
network initialized with a pre-trained LM predicts the next action. We demonstrate
that this framework enables effective combinatorial generalization across different
environments and supervisory modalities. We begin by assuming access to a set of
expert demonstrations, and show that initializing policies with LMs and ﬁne-tuning
them via behavior cloning improves task completion rates by 43.6% in the Virtual-
Home environment. Next, we integrate an active data gathering procedure in which
agents iteratively interact with the environment, relabel past “failed” experiences
with new goals, and update their policies in a self-supervised loop. Active data
gathering further improves combinatorial generalization, outperforming the best
baseline by 25.1%. Finally, we explain these results by investigating three possible
factors underlying the effectiveness of the LM-based policy. We ﬁnd that sequen-
tial input representations (vs. ﬁxed-dimensional feature vectors) and LM-based
weight initialization are both important for generalization. Surprisingly, however,
the format of the policy inputs encoding (e.g. as a natural language string vs. an
arbitrary sequential encoding) has little inﬂuence. Together, these results suggest
that language modeling induces representations that are useful for modeling not
just language, but also goals and plans; these representations can aid learning and
generalization even outside of language processing.2
1 Introduction
Language models (LMs) play a key role in machine learning approaches to natural language
processing tasks [ 9]. This includes tasks that are not purely linguistic, and require nontrivial planning
and reasoning capabilities [ 24,13]: for example, instruction following, vision-language navigation,
and visual question answering. Indeed, some of these tasks are so distant from language modeling
that one can ask whether pre-trained LMs can be used as a general framework even for tasks that
involve no language at all. If so, how might these capabilities be accessed in a model trained only to
process and generate natural language strings?
Correspondence to: Shuang Li <lishuang@mit.edu>
2Project page: https://shuangli-project.github.io/Pre-Trained-Language-Models-for-Interactive-Decision-
Making. Part of this work was done during Shuang’s internship at NVIDIA.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).arXiv:2202.01771v4  [cs.LG]  29 Oct 2022
Language ModelTask-specific ModelTokenization
Next actionatObservation otHistoryhtGoalgTokenizationTokenizationF𝜃F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃VirtualHome
BabyAIGraph partial observation:Goal predicates: Inside(pancake,stove):2
Grid partial observation:Language goal: Put the green box next to the purple boxagent
agentFigure 1: Environments (left): Different environments have different types of observations and goals. Our
approach (right): We use pre-trained LMs as a general framework for interactive decision-making by converting
policy inputs into sequential data. Such a method enables effective combinatorial generalization to novel tasks.
In this paper, we study these questions through the lens of embodied decision-making , investigating
the effectiveness of LM pre-training as a general framework for learning policies across a variety of
environments. We propose LID , a framework that uses Pre-Trained Language Models for Interactive
Decision-Making. As shown in Figure 1 (right), we encode the inputs to a policy—including
observations, goals, and history—as a sequence of embeddings. These embeddings are passed
to a policy network initialized with the parameters of a pre-trained LM, which is ﬁne-tuned to
predict actions. This framework is broadly applicable, accommodating goals and environment states
represented as natural language strings, image patches, or scene graphs.
We ﬁnd that imitation learning using pre-trained LMs as policy initializers improves in-domain
performance and enables strong generalization over novel tasks. For i.i.d. training and evaluation
tasks, this approach yields 20% more successful policies than other baseline methods in Virtual-
Home [ 31]. For combinatorial generalization to out-of-distribution tasks, i.e. tasks involving new
combinations of goals, states or objects, LM pre-training confers even more beneﬁts: it improves
task completion rates by 43.6% for novel tasks (see Figure 3). These results hold for a variety of
environment representations: encoding states as natural language strings, when possible, improves
the data-efﬁciency of training, but even LMs ﬁne-tuned on random environment encodings generalize
combinatorially to new goals and states when trained on large enough datasets.
We further examine how our method may be used in environments where expert data is not available,
and agents must instead actively gather data. To do this, we integrate an Active DataGathering
(ADG ) procedure into pre-trained LMs as shown in Figure 2. Our proposed approach to ADG
consists of three parts. First, exploration collects trajectories using a mix of random actions and
actions generated by the current policy. Exploration is insufﬁcient in this high dimensional problem
and most of the trajectories will likely fail to achieve the end goal. A key insight is that even the
failed trajectories contain useful sub-trajectories that solve certain sub-goals, and we relabel these
goals in a hindsight relabeling stage. The relabeled goal describes what was achieved in the extracted
sub-trajectory. The policy update stage samples relabeled trajectories to update the policy. The active
data gathering procedure allows us to train the LM-policy without pre-collected expert data. It also
outperforms reinforcement learning (RL) methods on embodied decision-making tasks and enables
more effective generalization to novel tasks.
Finally, we investigate whyLID contributes to generalization. We hypothesize three possible causes
for the effectiveness of LM-based policy initialization: (1) the use of language-based input encodings ,
and more generally LMs’ ability to reason about natural language strings; (2) the sequential structure
of transformer inputs, in contrast to the ﬁxed-sized observations used by most policy architectures,
and (3) task-general inductive bias conferred by weight initialization with LM pretraining. We
investigate (1) by encoding the policy inputs as different types of sequences. Different input encoding
schemes have only a negligible impact on the performance: the effectiveness of language modeling
is not limited to utilizing natural strings, but in fact extends to arbitrary sequential encodings. We
study (2) by encoding observations with a single vector embedding, thereby removing its sequential
structure. This operation signiﬁcantly degrades the model’s performance on novel tasks. Finally, we
investigate (3) by learning the parameters of the policy from scratch. The success rate after removing
the pre-trained LM weights drops by 11:2%, indicating that LM pretraining provides useful inductive
bias for sequence processing even when sequences are not natural language strings.
2
To summarize, our work has four main contributions:
•First, we propose to use pre-trained LMs as a general scaffold for interactive decision-making
across a variety of environments by converting all policy inputs into sequential data.
•Second, we demonstrate that language modeling improves combinatorial generalization in pol-
icy learning : initializing a policy with a pre-trained LM substantially improves out-of-distribution
performance on novel tasks.
•Third, we integrate an active data gathering procedure into the proposed approach to further
enable policy learning on environments without using pre-collected expert data.
•Finally, we perform several analyses to explain the generalization capabilities of pre-trained LMs,
ﬁnding that natural strings are not needed to beneﬁt from LM pre-training, but the sequential input
encoding and weight pre-training are important.
These results point to the effectiveness of the proposed framework with pre-trained LMs as a general-
purpose framework to promote structured generalization in interactive decision-making.
2 Related Work
In recent years, word and sentence representations from pre-trained LMs [ 29,9,33] have become
ubiquitous in natural language processing [ 49,30]. Some of the most successful applications of
pre-training lie at the boundary of natural language processing and other domains, as in instruction
following [13] and language-guided image retrieval [22].
Learning representations of language. From nearly the earliest days of the ﬁeld, natural language
processing researchers observed that representations of words derived from distributional statistics in
large text corpora serve as useful features for downstream tasks [ 8,11]. The earliest versions of these
representation learning schemes focused on isolated word forms [ 25,28]. However, recent years have
seen a number of techniques for training (masked or autoregressive) language models to produce
contextualized word representations (which incorporate information neighboring words in sentences
and paragraphs) via a variety of masked-word prediction objectives [9, 47].
Applications of pre-trained LMs. LMs can be ﬁne-tuned to perform language processing tasks
other than language modeling by casting those tasks as word-prediction problems. Successful uses
of representations from pre-trained models include syntactic parsing [ 19] and language-to-code
translation [ 45]; successful adaptations of LM prediction heads include machine translation [ 49],
sentiment classiﬁcation [ 6] and style transfer [ 18]. A number of tasks integrate language and other
modalities, including visual question answering and image captioning [ 48]. Recent works ﬁnd that
image representations can be injected directly into LMs’ embedding layers [42].
Policy learning and LM. Traditional policy learning methods, such as PPO [ 37], DQN [ 27],
DDPG [21], A3C [26], perform well on playing tasks on Atari, OpenAI gym [5], and MuJoCo [41].
Some of them might fail to solve more challenging tasks on embodied environments [ 31,39]. Several
recent papers [ 36,17,15] propose to use LM for policy learning. Frozen Pretrained Transformer
(FPT) [ 23] demonstrates that pre-trained LMs require very little ﬁne-tuning to match the performance
of task-speciﬁc models on several image classiﬁcation and numerical sequence processing tasks.
Semi-Supervised Skill Learning with Latent Language (SL)3[38] shows that LMs can serve as an
effective backbone for hierarchical policies that express plans as natural language strings [ 2,4]. In
this paper, we focus on building a general framework for decision-making tasks using pre-trained
LMs, even when language is not provided as an input or output.
3 Decision-Making and Language Modeling
3.1 POMDPs and Policy Learning
We explore the application of LMs to general sequential decision-making tasks in partially observed
environments. These tasks may be formalized as partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs). A POMDP is deﬁned by a set of states, a set of observations, a set of actions, and a
transition modelT(st+1jst;at)that maps the current state and action to the next state. Importantly,
in a POMDP setting, the observation otonly captures a portion of the underlying state st, and an
3
optimal decision-making strategy (a policy ) must incorporate both the current observation and the
history of previous observations and actions. In our experiments, policies are parametric models
(atjg;ht;ot)that output the probability of an action given the goals g, history information ht=
fo1;a1;;ot 1;at 1g, and partial observations otof the current state st.
In Figure 1 (right), we show a high-level overview of the proposed method. We ﬁrst convert all policy
inputs into a sequence and provide them as input to a transformer encoder. Representations from this
encoder model are then passed to a task-speciﬁc decoder that predicts actions. We collect a dataset
ofNtraining trajectories D=fdigN
i=1, where each trajectory consists of a goal and a sequence of
observations and actions: di=fgi;oi
1;ai
1;;oi
Ti;ai
Tig, whereTiis the length of the trajectory. We
then train the policy to maximize the probability of actions we want to achieve ai=fai
1;:::;ai
Tig
across trajectories using the cross-entropy loss:
= arg min
 
 NX
i=1TiX
t=1ln(ai
tjgi;hi
t;oi
t)!
: (1)
3.2 Language models as policy initializers
Our experiments focus on autoregressive ,transformer-based LMs [43]. These models are trained
to ﬁt a distribution over a text sequence y=fyign
i=1via the chain rule p(y) =p(y1)Qn
i=2p(yij
y1;:::;yi 1). Each term on the right hand side is parameterized by a transformer network, which
accepts the conditioned tokens as input. Each token passes through a learned embedding layer F,
then the full conditioned sequence is fed into the LM. In our work, we use a standard LM, GPT-2, to
process the input sequence rather than to predict future tokens.
Both POMDP decision-making and language modeling are naturally framed as sequence prediction
tasks, where successive words or actions/observations are predicted based on a sequence of previous
words or actions/observations. This suggests that pre-trained LMs can be used to initialize POMDP
policies by ﬁne-tuning them to model high-reward or expert trajectories, as described below.
4 Approach
We evaluate the effectiveness of pre-trained LMs in solving decision-making tasks across envi-
ronments. We use BabyAI [16] and VirtualHome [31] to evaluate the proposed method. While
both environments feature complex goals, the nature of these goals, as well as the state and action
sequences that accomplish them, differ substantially across environments (Figure 1 (left)).
4.1 Policy Network
We ﬁrst examine whether pre-trained LMs provide effective initializers when states and action
histories are represented as natural language strings. We encode the inputs to the policy—including
observations, goals, and action histories—as sequences of words. These word sequences are passed
to the LM (using its pre-trained word embedding layer F) and used to obtain contextualized token
representations. Token representations are averaged and used to predict actions. We design a policy
network following the general policy framework proposed in Figure 1.
Environment encodings in VirtualHome. In VirtualHome, each goal consists of a sequence of pred-
icates and multiplicities, and is translated into a templated English sentence ( e.g. “Inside(apple,
fridge):2 ” becomes “put two apples inside the fridge”). To encode the agent’s partial observation,
we extract a list of currently visible objects, their states ( e.g. “open, clean”), and 3D world coordinates.
We use a fully-connected layer to encode the 3D information and generate a feature representation of
each object in the observation. To encode history, we store information about all previous actions and
convert them into templated English sentences ( e.g. “I have put the plate on the kitchen table and the
apple inside the fridge”).
Environment encodings in BabyAI. The observation by default is a 77grid. We convert the
observation into 77text descriptions, e.g. “purple ball”, “grey wall”, “open door”, and combine
them into a long sentence. We then convert the history actions into text descriptions, e.g. “turn left”
and “go forward”. We combine the language instruction (without modiﬁcation) with the observation
and history text descriptions, and feed them to the pre-trained LM.
4
We note that the policy network described above does not strictly require that these encodings take
the form of natural language strings—other encodings of the environment as a sequence also work
(see Section 7). This framework could be also generalized to support pixel-based observations using
discretization schemes like the one employed in the Vision Transformer [10].
Action prediction. We pool LM outputs into a “context representation” that is used to predict the
next action. In training, we maximize the probabilities of demonstrated actions. In inference, we
select the valid action with the highest probability. See Appendix C.1 for details.
VirtualHome and BabyAI have quite different observation spaces, action spaces, and goal spaces;
however, we show that embedding policy inputs as sequences and utilizing the pre-trained LM as a
policy initializer, enables effective generalization to novel tasks on both environments. We note that
LID is not limited to VirtualHome and BabyAI, but is straightforwardly applicable to other embodied
environments, such as ALFRED [40] and iGibson [39].
4.2 Training
We ﬁrst examine LID through imitation learning on data collected by experts in Section 4.2.1. We
then show that integrating an active data gathering procedure into LID enables policy learning without
using expert data in Section 4.2.2. We use VirtualHome as an example to explain the data gathering.
4.2.1 Policy Learning with Expert Data
The policy model is ﬁrst initialized from a pre-trained LM and then ﬁne-tuned on data collected
by experts. We build on the VirtualHome environment to collect a set of expert trajectories using
regression planning [ 20] and create a VirtualHome-Imitation Learning dataset . Given a task
described by goal predicates, the planner generates an action sequence to accomplish this task (See
Appendix E.1 ). The planner has access to privileged information, such as information about the
pre-conditions and effects of each action, allowing an agent to robustly perform tasks in partially
observable environments and generate expert trajectories for training and evaluation.
4.2.2 Policy Learning with Active Data Gathering
-Interacted objects-Navigation trajectory-Useful sub-trajectory for hindsight relabeling1. Exploration
2. Hindsight RelabelingRelabel a task goal for the useful sub-trajectory:On (apple, kitchen table): 13. Policy updateSample a random goals:Inside (milk, fridge)Actions generated by the current policy or random exploration:[open] <kitchen cabinet> …[put] <apple> <kitchentable>…
Figure 2: LID with the active data gathering procedure. By
iteratively repeating the exploration, hindsight relabeling, and policy
update, LID with active data gathering can learn an effective policy
without using pre-collected expert data.Collecting expert data is sometimes
challenging. It may require privileged
information of the environment or hu-
man annotations, which can be time-
consuming and difﬁcult to scale. A
promising way to scale up supervi-
sion is Hindsight Experience Replay
(HER) [ 3], which allows agents to
learn from orders of magnitude more
data without supervision. However,
existing HER methods [ 12] focus on
simple tasks with small state/action
space and full observability. They can-
not tackle more complicated embod-
ied decision-making tasks, requiring
nontrivial planning and reasoning or
natural language understanding. LID
with the active data gathering ( LID-
ADG ) can be used in solving tasks in
such environments.
As shown in Figure 2, LID-ADG consists of three stages, i.e.exploration ,hindsight relabeling ,
andpolicy update . The key idea is to gradually improve the task success rate by asking the agent
to iteratively explore the environment, relabel failure samples, and update its policy using imitation
learning. In the exploration stage, we ﬁrst randomly sample a goal and an initial state. We then
use a mix of random actions and actions generated by the current policy (atjg;ht;ot)to obtain
the next action. We repeat this process until this episode ends. We collect Mtrajectories and store
them in the replay buffers. The generated actions in the early stages rarely complete the given task.
5
However, even the failed trajectories contain useful sub-trajectories that solve certain sub-goals. In
thehindsight relabeling stage, we extract useful sub-trajectories and relabel a goal g0for each of
them. We design a goal relabel function flthat generates a goal based on the sequence of observations
and actions using hand-designed templates. In practice, we implement the goal relabel function as
a program (see Appendix E.2 ). The hindsight relabeling stage allows sample-efﬁcient learning by
reusing the failure cases. During policy update , the agent samples the data from the replay buffers
and updates its policy network .
By interleaving the exploration, hindsight relabeling, and policy update, LID-ADG can gradually
improve the policy without requiring pre-collected expert data. In embodied environments with
large action spaces, sparse rewards, and long-horizon planning, RL methods often struggle to obtain
stable policy gradients during training. Our method enables sample-efﬁcient learning from the sparse
rewards by relabeling new goals for the bad samples that the agent fails to achieve. In addition,
LID-ADG leverages the stability of supervised learning in the policy update stage, enabling it to
outperform RL approaches on a wide range of decision-making tasks.
5 Experiment Setup
We evaluate the proposed method and baselines on VirtualHome and BabyAI.
5.1 VirtualHome
VirtualHome is a 3D embodied environment featuring partial observability, large action spaces, and
long time horizons. We evaluate policies’ performance from three aspects: (1) performance on
in-distribution tasks; (2) generalization to novel scenes; and (3) generalization to novel tasks.
In-Distribution. The predicate types and their counts in the goal are randomly sampled from the
same distribution as the training data. The objects are initially placed in the environment according to
common-sense layouts ( e.g. plates appear inside the kitchen cabinets rather than the bathtub).
Novel Scenes. The objects are placed in random positions in the initial environment without common-
sense constraints ( e.g. apples may appear inside the dishwasher).
Novel Tasks. The components of all goal predicates are never seen together during training ( e.g. both
plates and fridges appear in training goals, but Inside(plate, fridge) only appears in the test
set. (See Appendix F for more details.)
We evaluate the success rates of different methods on each test set. A given episode is scored as
successful if the policy completes its entire goal within the maximum allowed steps of the environment.
On each of the 3 test subsets, we use 5 different random seeds and test 100tasks under each seed.
Thus there are 1500 examples used to evaluate each model.
5.2 BabyAI
BabyAI is a 2D grid world environment for instruction following. Observations in BabyAI are
773grids describing a partial and local egocentric view of the state of the environment.
We evaluate the methods on four representative tasks: GoToRedBall ,GoToLocal ,PickupLoc , and
PutNextLocal . Performing well on the test set requires the models to generalize to new environment
layouts and goals, resulting in new combinations of tasks not seen in training. For each method, we
compute success rates over 500episodes on each task.
6 Experiments
We ﬁrst show results of the proposed method and baselines for embodied decision-making tasks using
expert data in Section 6.1. We then show our results when using actively gathered data in Section 6.2.
6.1 Embodied Decision Making with Pre-trained Language Model (LID)
6.1.1 Results on VirtualHome
We evaluate the following methods:
6
In-Distribution Novel Scenes Novel Tasks0255075100Success RateMLP-1
MLPLSTM
LID-Text (Ours)Figure 3: Comparisons of the proposed method and
baselines on VirtualHome. All the methods are trained
on expert data using imitation learning. MLP-1 ,MLP ,
andLSTM are baselines without using the pre-trained
LM. The proposed method, LID-Text (Ours) , outper-
forms all baselines.Tasks Methods Number of Demos
100 500 1K 5K 10K
GoToRedBallBabyAI-Ori [16] 81.0 96.0 99.0 99.5 99.9
LID-Text (Ours) 93.9 99.4 99.7 100.0 100.0
GoToLocalBabyAI-Ori [16] 55.9 84.3 98.6 99.9 99.8
LID-Text (Ours) 64.6 97.9 99.0 99.5 99.5
PickupLocBabyAI-Ori [16] 28.0 58.0 93.3 97.9 99.8
LID-Text (Ours) 28.7 73.4 99.0 99.6 99.8
PutNextLocalBabyAI-Ori [16] 14.3 16.8 43.4 81.2 97.7
LID-Text (Ours) 11.1 93.0 93.2 98.9 99.9
Table 1: Success rates on BabyAI tasks. All the
methods are trained on ofﬂine expert data using imita-
tion learning. LID-Text (Ours) outperforms BabyAI-
Ori, the method used in the original paper [16].
LID-Text (Ours) is the proposed method that converts all environments inputs into text descriptions.
The pre-trained LM is ﬁne-tuned for decision-making (conditioned on goals, observations, and
histories) as described in Section 4.1.
Recurrent Network . We compare our method with a recurrent baseline using an LSTM [ 14] to
encode the history information. The hidden representation from the last timestep, together with the
goal and current observation, are used to predict the next action.
MLP andMLP-1 . We perform additional comparisons with baselines that do not use recurrent
networks or pre-trained LMs. MLP andMLP-1 take the goal, histories, and the current observation as
input and send them to the multilayer perceptron neural network (MLP) to predict actions. MLP-1 has
three more average-pooling layers than MLP that average the features of tokens in the goal, history
actions, and the current observation, respectively, before sending them to the MLP layer.
Quantitative results . Each method is trained on 20Kdemos from the VirtualHome-Imitation
Learning dataset, and then evaluated on the three test subsets: In-Distribution ,Novel Scenes , and
Novel Tasks . In Figure 3, LID-Text (Ours) , which initializes the policy with a pre-trained LM,
has higher success rates than other methods. This difference is most pronounced in the Novel
Tasks setting, where test tasks require combinatorial generalization across goals that are never seen
during training. Here, LID-Text (Ours) dramatically ( 43:6%) improves upon all baselines. Such
combinatorial generalization is necessary to construct general purpose agents, but is often difﬁcult for
existing approaches. Our results suggest that pre-trained LMs can serve as a computational backbone
for combinatorial generalization.
6.1.2 Results on BabyAI
We use the standard training and test data provided by [ 16]. In BabyAI, performing well on unseen
test tasks with new environment layouts and goals requires combinatorial reasoning. In Table 1, we
report the success rate of models trained on different number of demos. BabyAI-Ori [16] is the
method used in the original paper. LID-Text (Ours) is the proposed method that converts policy
inputs into a text sequence. Given enough training data, i.e. 10K demos, both methods achieve high
success rates, but LID-Text (Ours) outperforms BabyAI-Ori with less training data, indicating the
proposed method improves sample efﬁciency when generalizing to novel tasks.
6.2 Pre-trained Language Model with Active Data Gathering (LID-ADG)
We compare LID-ADG , the proposed LM framework for decision-making using actively gathered
data (Section 4.2.2), to a variety of baselines that do not use pre-collected expert data on VirtualHome.
Random. The agent selects the next action randomly from the valid action space at that state.
Goal-Object. The agent randomly selects an object that in the goal and in the valid action space
to interact with. For example, given a goal of “ Inside(apple, fridge):1 ”, this baseline might
choose “grab apple”, “open fridge”, or other actions containing “apple” or “fridge”. Online RL. We
compare with PPO [ 37], one of the most commonly used online RL methods. For fair comparison,
we equip PPO with the same main policy network as the proposed method. Our implementation
7
In-Distribution Novel Scenes Novel Tasks
Random 0.00.0 0.00.0 0.00.0
Goal-Object 0.80.5 0.00.0 0.40.4
PPO 0.00.0 0.00.0 0.00.0
DQN+HER 0.00.0 0.00.0 0.00.0
LID-ADG (Ours) 46.7 2.7 32.23.3 25.54.1
Table 2: Comparisons of methods without using
expert data on VirtualHome. LID-ADG (Ours) is
the only successful approach.In-Distribution Novel Scenes Novel Tasks
LID-ADG (Ours) 46.72.7 32.23.3 25.54.1
PPO (LID-ADG Init) 53.7 3.5 30.23.4 27.82.7
DT (LID-ADG Data) 42.41.5 21.62.48 16.81.0
Table 3: The proposed method with active data gather-
ing,LID-ADG (Ours), can be used as an policy initial-
izer for online RL or a data provider for ofﬂine RL.
is based on Stable Baselines3 [ 35].Hindsight Experience Replay. We compare with DQN+HER
used in [3] and modify its main policy network to be the same as the proposed method.
Quantitative results . We compare LID-ADG with baselines on VirtualHome in Table 2. Each
experiment is performed 5 times with different random seeds. The Random baseline is always 0,
indicating the tasks in VirtualHome cannot be easily solved by a random policy. Goal-Object is
better than Random because Goal-Object has access to objects in the goal and it samples actions
from a much smaller action space. The online RL baseline, PPO , fails to solve tasks in VirtualHome
featured by partially observation, large state/action space, and long-term horizon. DQN+HER
works well on simple tasks on 2D environments, but they cannot tackle VirtualHome tasks neither,
requiring nontrivial planning and reasoning. LID-ADG does not require expert data and can solve
the complicated tasks in 3D embodied environments which cannot be easily achieved using RL.3
Policy initializer and data provider. LID-ADG can further be used to initialize the weights for ﬁne-
tuning RL policies and to gather data for ofﬂine learning. As shown in Table 2, directly training RL,
e.g. PPO, fails to solve tasks in VirtualHome. However, after using the policy trained by LID-ADG
to initialize the PPO policy, we may effectively learn an interactive policy with good performance. In
Table 3, PPO (LID-ADG Init) is initialized from LID-ADG and further ﬁne-tuned to solve the tasks
in VirtualHome. After initialization, PPO improves its success rate by 53:7%on the In-Distribution
setting (See PPO results in Table 2 and Table 3). In addition, LID-ADG can provide data for ofﬂine
learning. LID-ADG saves the relabeled data in replay buffers. We train Decision Transformer
(DT) [7] using the data collected by LID-ADG. See DT (LID-ADG Data) in Table 3.
7 Analysis: Understanding the Sources of Generalization
The pre-trained LM policy, ﬁne-tuned on either expert data or actively gathered data, exhibits effective
combinatorial generalization. Is this simply because LMs are effective models of relations between
natural language descriptions of states and actions [ 1], or because they provide a more general
framework for combinatorial generalization in decision-making? We hypothesize and investigate
three possible factors to understand the sources of such combinatorial generalization. We use policies
trained on the expert data as an example to explain the experiments.
7.1 Input Encoding Scheme
We ﬁrst hypothesize that converting environment inputs into natural language contributes to the
combinatorial generalization as the LMs are trained on language data. We explore the role of natural
language by investigating three alternative ways of encoding policy inputs to our model without using
natural language strings: two in VirtualHome, and one in BabyAI. BabyAI results are in Appendix A.
Index encoding in VirtualHome. Rather than natural language strings, LID-Index (Ours) converts
policy inputs into integer indices. LID-Index (Ours) retains the discrete, serial format of the goal,
history, and observation, but replaces each word with an integer, and replaces the embedding layer
from the pre-trained LM with a new embedding layer trained from scratch. For example, grab apple
is mapped to (5,3) based on the positions of grab andapple in the vocabulary set.
Unnatural string encoding in VirtualHome. LID-Unnatural (Ours) replaces the natural language
tokens (e.g. converting the goal “ On(fork, table):1 ” toput one fork on the table ) with random
ones (e.g. converting On(fork, table) tobrought wise character trees ﬁne yet ). This is done by
3Note that the results of LID-Text in Figure 3 and results of LID-ADG in Table 2 are not directly comparable
because the difﬁculty level of the evaluated tasks are different. See Appendix F for more details.
8
Table 4: Success rates of policies trained with different input encodings in the Novel Tasks setting on
VirtualHome. The text encoding is the most sample-efﬁcient, but all models converge to similar performance
given sufﬁcient training data.
Methods Number of Demos
100 500 1K 5K 10K 20K
LID-Text (Ours) 8.8 1.4 22.21.7 26.81.0 46.01.0 58.21.2 58.21.6
LID-Index (Ours) 6.40.6 18.03.8 18.81.0 45.52.1 54.60.8 57.80.9
LID-Unnatural (Ours) 6.81.3 18.62.1 27.01.1 47.21.7 55.80.8 58.80.9
randomly permuting the entire vocabulary, mapping each token to a new token. Such a permutation
breaks the semantic information in natural strings.
LID-Index (Ours) andLID-Unnatural (Ours) have the same policy network as LID-Text (Ours) .
All are ﬁne-tuned on the expert data. The averaged results using 5 different random seeds on the
Novel Tasks setting are reported in Table 4. Given few training data, e.g. 100 demos, all the models
perform poorly, with success rates lower than 10%.LID-Text (Ours) achieves higher success rates
than LID-Index (Ours) andLID-Unnatural (Ours) when dataset size increases, e.g.LID-Text (Ours)
is around 4%higher than LID-Index (Ours) andLID-Unnatural (Ours) with 500 training demos.
When the training dataset is further enlarged, e.g. 20K demos, success rates of all approaches reach
similar performance. This result indicates that the effectiveness of pre-trained LMs in compositional
generalization is not unique to natural language strings, but can be leveraged from arbitrary encodings,
although adapting the model to arbitrary encodings may require more training data.
7.2 Sequential Input Representation
Table 5: Experiments on sequential inputs and
weight initialization. Fine-tuning the pre-trained
weights and the usage of sequential encoding are
important for combinatorial generalization.
In-Distribution Novel Tasks
LID-Text (Ours) 87.61.9 58.22.3
No-Seq 74.02.3 2.00.6
No-Pretrain 90.8 2.0 47.02.8
No-FT 51.24.5 17.02.9Next, we explore whether generalization re-
quires the sequential processing mechanisms in
transformer-based LMs. We investigate whether the
LM pre-trained policy will still be effective when
the input encoding is not sequential. No-Seq en-
codes the goal as a single vector by averaging all
goal embeddings. History and observation features
are obtained in the same way. All features are then
sent to the pre-trained LM to predict actions. As
shown in Table 5, removing sequential structure
signiﬁcantly hurts performance on Novel Tasks .No-
Seqachieves good performance on test tasks that are closer to training tasks, but cannot generalize
well to more challenging unseen tasks. Thus, combinatorial generalization in pre-trained LMs may
be attributed in part to transformers’ ability to process sequential input representations effectively.
7.3 Favorable Weight Initialization
Finally, we investigate if the favorable weight initialization from LM pre-training enables effective
generalization of the proposed model. No-Pretrain does not initialize the policy using the pre-trained
LM, but instead training the policy on the expert data from scratch. In Table 5, we ﬁnd that removing
the pre-trained weights can ﬁt the in-domain data and thus performs well on the In-Distribution
setting. However, its success rate is 11:2%lower than the proposed model on the Novel Tasks setting,
indicating the pre-trained weights are important for effective generalization, but not necessary for
effective data ﬁtting. We further test a baseline, No-FT , that keeps the pre-trained weights of the
language model but freezes them while training the rest model on our expert data. Freezing the pre-
trained weights without ﬁne-tuning signiﬁcantly hurts the performance on both settings, suggesting
that ﬁne-tuning of the transformer weights is essential for effective combinatorial generalization.
Together, these results suggest that sequential input representations (vs. ﬁxed-dimensional feature
vectors) and favorable weight initialization are both important for generalization, however, the
input encoding schemes (e.g. as a natural language string vs. an arbitrary encoding scheme) has
little inﬂuence. These results point to the potential broader applicability of pre-trained LMs as a
computational backbone for compositional embodied decision making, where arbitrary inputs, such
as language, images, or grids, may be converted to sequential encodings.
9
Novel TasksGoal: Inside (cutlery fork, fridge): 1
Walk to Kitchen CabinetOpen Kitchen CabinetGrab Cutlery ForkWalk to FridgeOpen FridgePut Cutlery Forkinside the FridgeWalk to DishwasherOpen Dishwasher
GoToLocalGoal: go to the grey keyRightForwardRight
PickupLocGoal: pick up the purple key on your rightForwardForwardRightPickupStart
Goal: Inside (pancake, stove): 1; Close (stove); SwitchOn(stove)
In-Distribution
Walk to LivingroomWalk to PancakeGrab PancakeWalk to KitchenOpen StovePut Pancake inside the StoveClose StoveSwitch on StoveFigure 4: Qualitative results of our model on VirtualHome and BabyAI. We only show a sub-trajectory in
each example to save space. The interacted objects are labelled by green bounding boxes.
Goal: Inside (chicken, oven): 1; Close (oven); TurnON(oven)Policy Error
Grounding ErrorGoal: Inside (salmon, fridge): 1; Inside (sundae, fridge):1
Walk to StoveOpen StoveWalk to BedroomWalk to CabinetGrab CutletsOpen FridgePut Cutlets inside the FridgeWalk to Bedroom
Goal: On (fork, kitchen table): 1Goal: On (pillow, bed ): 1
Walk to BedroomWalk to LivingroomWalk to CabinetOpen CabinetWalk to Kitchen Counter Drawer Walk to RugGrab ApplePut Apple on Kitchen Table
Figure 5: Failure cases. We show failure cases caused by the grounding error and policy error. The interacted
objects are labelled by green bounding boxes.
8 Qualitative Results
In Figure 4, we show examples of LID-Text (Ours) completing tasks in VirtualHome and BabyAI.
We show two successful examples from VirtualHome on the In-Distribution andNovel Tasks settings,
and two successful examples from BabyAI on solving the GoToLocal andPickupLoc tasks. We only
show short trajectories or extract a sub-trajectory for saving space.
Failure case analysis. In Figure 5, we show some failure cases of the proposed method. We observed
two main types of failure cases: grounding error and policy error. For failures caused by the grounding
error, the agent interacts with a wrong object that is not related to the given goal, e.g. the agent puts
cutlets instead of the salmon inside the fridge. For failures caused by the policy error, the agent
cannot ﬁnd the target objects or does not interact with them. The proposed method that converts
policy inputs into sequential encodings and feeds them to the general LM framework can accomplish
decision-making tasks efﬁciently, however, there are still challenging tasks that the policy fails to
accomplish. Larger LMs, e.g. GPT-3 [6], may improve the success rate of those challenging tasks.
9 Conclusion and Broader Impact
In this paper, we introduced LID, a general approach to sequential decision-making that converts
goals, histories, and observations into sequences and processes them using a policy initialized with
a pre-trained LM. We integrated an active data gathering procedure into the proposed method to
enable policy learning without using expert data. Our analysis showed that input representation and
favorable weight initialization both contribute to the generalization while the input encoding scheme
has little inﬂuence. One drawback of the active data gathering is that it relies on hand-designed rules
for task relabeling. More generally, a potential disadvantage of the proposed approach is that biases
of the pre-trained LMs may inﬂuence its behavior, and further study of LID-based models’ bias is
required before they may be deployed in sensitive downstream applications. Nevertheless, our results
demonstrate that LID enables effective combinatorial generalization across different environments,
and highlight the promise of LM pre-training for more general decision-making problems.
10
References
[1]P. Ammanabrolu and M. O. Riedl. Playing text-adventure games with graph-based deep
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01628 , 2018.
[2]J. Andreas and D. Klein. Learning with latent language. In North American Association for
Computational Linguistics , 2022.
[3]M. Andrychowicz, F. Wolski, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong, P. Welinder, B. McGrew, J. Tobin,
P. Abbeel, and W. Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01495 ,
2017.
[4]M. L. Athul Paul Jacob and J. Andreas. Multitasking inhibits semantic drift. In North American
Association for Computational Linguistics , 2021.
[5]G. Brockman, V . Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba.
Openai gym, 2016.
[6]T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan,
P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14165 , 2020.
[7]L. Chen, K. Lu, A. Rajeswaran, K. Lee, A. Grover, M. Laskin, P. Abbeel, A. Srinivas, and
I. Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.01345 , 2021.
[8]S. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer, and R. Harshman. Indexing by latent
semantic analysis. Journal of the American society for information science , 41(6):391–407,
1990.
[9]J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018.
[10] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani,
M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020.
[11] S. T. Dumais. Latent semantic analysis. Annual review of information science and technology ,
38(1):188–230, 2004.
[12] D. Ghosh, A. Gupta, A. Reddy, J. Fu, C. Devin, B. Eysenbach, and S. Levine. Learning to reach
goals via iterated supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06088 , 2019.
[13] F. Hill, S. Mokra, N. Wong, and T. Harley. Human instruction-following with deep reinforcement
learning via transfer-learning from text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09382 , 2020.
[14] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation , 9(8):1735–
1780, 1997.
[15] W. Huang, P. Abbeel, D. Pathak, and I. Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot planners:
Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07207 , 2022.
[16] D. Y .-T. Hui, M. Chevalier-Boisvert, D. Bahdanau, and Y . Bengio. Babyai 1.1, 2020.
[17] E. Jang, A. Irpan, M. Khansari, D. Kappler, F. Ebert, C. Lynch, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Bc-z:
Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In Conference on Robot Learning ,
pages 991–1002. PMLR, 2022.
[18] N. S. Keskar, B. McCann, L. R. Varshney, C. Xiong, and R. Socher. Ctrl: A conditional
transformer language model for controllable generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05858 ,
2019.
[19] N. Kitaev, S. Cao, and D. Klein. Multilingual constituency parsing with self-attention and
pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.11760 , 2018.
11
[20] R. E. Korf. Planning as search: A quantitative approach. Artiﬁcial intelligence , 33(1):65–88,
1987.
[21] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y . Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra.
Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971 , 2015.
[22] J. Lu, D. Batra, D. Parikh, and S. Lee. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguistic
representations for vision-and-language tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.02265 , 2019.
[23] K. Lu, A. Grover, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch. Pretrained transformers as universal computation
engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.05247 , 2021.
[24] A. Majumdar, A. Shrivastava, S. Lee, P. Anderson, D. Parikh, and D. Batra. Improving vision-
and-language navigation with image-text pairs from the web. In European Conference on
Computer Vision , pages 259–274. Springer, 2020.
[25] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean. Distributed representations of
words and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 3111–3119, 2013.
[26] V . Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley, D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu.
Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine
learning , pages 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.
[27] V . Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller.
Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013.
[28] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word representation.
InProceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing
(EMNLP) , pages 1532–1543, 2014.
[29] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer. Deep
contextualized word representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365 , 2018.
[30] E. A. Platanios, A. Pauls, S. Roy, Y . Zhang, A. Kyte, A. Guo, S. Thomson, J. Krishnamurthy,
J. Wolfe, J. Andreas, et al. Value-agnostic conversational semantic parsing. In Proceedings
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 3666–3681, 2021.
[31] X. Puig, K. Ra, M. Boben, J. Li, T. Wang, S. Fidler, and A. Torralba. Virtualhome: Simulating
household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 8494–8502, 2018.
[32] X. Puig, T. Shu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. B. Tenenbaum, S. Fidler, and A. Torralba. Watch-and-help:
A challenge for social perception and human-ai collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09890 ,
2020.
[33] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever. Improving language understanding
by generative pre-training. 2018.
[34] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever, et al. Language models are
unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9, 2019.
[35] A. Rafﬁn, A. Hill, A. Gleave, A. Kanervisto, M. Ernestus, and N. Dormann. Stable-baselines3:
Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
22(268):1–8, 2021.
[36] M. Reid, Y . Yamada, and S. S. Gu. Can wikipedia help ofﬂine reinforcement learning? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.12122 , 2022.
[37] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017.
12
[38] P. Sharma, A. Torralba, and J. Andreas. Skill induction and planning with latent language. In
Association for Computational Linguistics , 2022.
[39] B. Shen, F. Xia, C. Li, R. Martín-Martín, L. Fan, G. Wang, S. Buch, C. D’Arpino, S. Srivas-
tava, L. P. Tchapmi, et al. igibson, a simulation environment for interactive tasks in large
realisticscenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02924 , 2020.
[40] M. Shridhar, J. Thomason, D. Gordon, Y . Bisk, W. Han, R. Mottaghi, L. Zettlemoyer, and
D. Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions for everyday tasks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages
10740–10749, 2020.
[41] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y . Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pages 5026–5033. IEEE,
2012.
[42] M. Tsimpoukelli, J. Menick, S. Cabi, S. Eslami, O. Vinyals, and F. Hill. Multimodal few-shot
learning with frozen language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13884 , 2021.
[43] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and
I. Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762 , 2017.
[44] J. Vig. A multiscale visualization of attention in the transformer model. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations ,
pages 37–42, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[45] B. Wang, R. Shin, X. Liu, O. Polozov, and M. Richardson. Rat-sql: Relation-aware schema
encoding and linking for text-to-sql parsers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.04942 , 2019.
[46] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V . Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi, P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf,
M. Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771 , 2019.
[47] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y . Yang, J. Carbonell, R. R. Salakhutdinov, and Q. V . Le. Xlnet: Gener-
alized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer, F. d 'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[48] Z. Yang, N. Garcia, C. Chu, M. Otani, Y . Nakashima, and H. Takemura. Bert representations for
video question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications
of Computer Vision , pages 1556–1565, 2020.
[49] J. Zhu, Y . Xia, L. Wu, D. He, T. Qin, W. Zhou, H. Li, and T.-Y . Liu. Incorporating bert into
neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06823 , 2020.
13
Checklist
1. For all authors...
(a)Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reﬂect the paper’s
contributions and scope? [Yes]
(b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes] See Section 9.
(c)Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [Yes] See
Section 9.
(d)Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
them? [Yes]
2. If you are including theoretical results...
(a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [N/A]
(b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [N/A]
3. If you ran experiments...
(a)Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main ex-
perimental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes] In the
supplemental material.
(b)Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
were chosen)? [Yes] See Section 6 and Appendix C.2.
(c)Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
ments multiple times)? [Yes] See Section 6.
(d)Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes] See Appendix C.2.
4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
(a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [Yes]
(b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [N/A]
(c)Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [N/A]
(d)Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
using/curating? [N/A]
(e)Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identiﬁable
information or offensive content? [Yes] See Section 9.
5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
(a)Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
applicable? [N/A]
(b)Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [N/A]
(c)Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
spent on participant compensation? [N/A]
14
Appendix
In this appendix, we ﬁrst show the convolutional encoding in BabyAI in Appendix A. We then
describe the environment details in Appendix B and the implementation details of the proposed
model in Appendix C. We show the algorithm of interactive evaluation in Section D and the data
gathering procedure in Appendix E. The goal predicates used in VirtualHome test subsets are shown
in Appendix F. We visualize the attention weights in language models in Appendix G.
A Convolutional encoding in BabyAI
In the main paper Section 7.1, we explore the role of natural language by investigating two alternative
ways of encoding policy inputs in VirtualHome. In this section, we show the third way of encoding
policy inputs in BabyAI.
We test a new model, LID-Conv (Ours) , that converts environment inputs into convolutional
embeddings . We pass the 773grid observation in BabyAI to convolutional layers and obtain
a77dfeature map, where dis the feature dimension. We ﬂatten the feature map and get a
sequence of features to describe the observation. The rest of the model is the same as LID-Text
(Ours) . Table 6 shows the results of policies using the text encoding andconvolutional encoding .
LID-Text (Ours) andLID-Conv (Ours) have similar results given enough training data, but LID-Text
(Ours) is slightly better when there are fewer training data. This conclusion is coincident with the
results on VirtualHome.
Different input encoding schemes have only a negligible impact on model performance: the effective-
ness of pre-training is not limited to utilizing natural strings, but in fact extends to arbitrary sequential
encodings.
Table 6: Success rate of policies trained with text encoding vs.convolutional encoding on BabyAI. The
text encoding is more sample-efﬁcient, but both models converge to near perfect performance given sufﬁcient
training data.
Tasks Methods Number of Demos
100 500 1K 5K 10K
GoToRedBallLID-Text (Ours) 93.9 99.4 99.7 100.0 100.0
LID-Conv (Ours) 92.5 98.8 100.0 100.0 100.0
GoToLocalLID-Text (Ours) 64.6 97.9 99.0 99.5 99.5
LID-Conv (Ours) 69.5 86.0 98.2 99.9 99.9
PickupLocLID-Text (Ours) 28.7 73.4 99.0 99.6 99.8
LID-Conv (Ours) 25.0 58.8 95.1 99.6 100.0
PutNextLocalLID-Text (Ours) 11.1 93.0 93.2 98.9 99.9
LID-Conv (Ours) 17.9 53.6 91.3 97.7 99.5
B Environments
We use BabyAI [16] and VirtualHome [31] to evaluate the proposed method. While both environ-
ments feature complex goals, the nature of these goals, as well as the state and action sequences that
accomplish them, differ substantially across environments.
B.1 VirtualHome
VirtualHome is a 3D realistic environment featuring partial observability, large action spaces, and
long time horizons. It provides a set of realistic 3D homes and objects that can be manipulated to
perform household organization tasks.
Goal Space. For each task, we deﬁne the goal as a set of predicates and multiplicities. For example,
Inside(apple, fridge):2 ;Inside(pancake, fridge):1 ; means “put two apples and one
pancake inside the fridge”. In each task, the initial environment (including initial object locations),
the goal predicates, and their orders and multiplicities are randomly sampled. There are 59different
types of predicates in total.
15
Tokenization
Context featurefcHistoryht<walk> [kitchen]…<put> [apple] <in> [cabinet]
Cross-entropy lossAverage PoolingF𝜃F𝜃F𝜃TokenizationINSIDE(pancake, fridge):2…ON(apple, table):1GoalgTokenizationagentkitchenapplefridgecabinetPartial observation ot
Object embeddings………F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃F𝜃FCFC
FCIntermediate valuesAction probabilitiesTrainingInferencePre-trained Language Model(𝑥,𝑦,𝑧)FC(𝑥,𝑦,𝑧)FC
Fine-tunedTrained from scratch220221222223224225226227228229230231232233234235236237238239240241242243244245246247248249250251252253254255256257258259260261262263264265266267268269270271272273274Pre-Trained Language Models for Interactive Decision-Makingobservation into a sequence of image patches as in VisionTransformer (Dosovitskiy et al.,2020).4.1.1. POLICYNETWORKWe choose to convert the observations, goal predicates, andhistory information into token sequences and pass them to apre-trained language model. We take the text tokens as anexample to explain the proposed method.Goal.Each goal consists of a sequence of predicates andmultiplicities, and is translated into a templated English sen-tence (e.g.“Inside(apple, fridge):2” becomes“put two apples inside the fridge”).Observation.To en-code the agent’s partial observation, we extract a list ofcurrently visible objects, their states (e.g. “open, clean”),and 3D world coordinates. We use a fully-connected layer toencode the 3D information and generate a feature represen-tation of each object in the observation. SeeAppendixB.1for more details.History.We store information about allprevious actions and convert them into templated Englishsentences (e.g. “I have put the plate on the kitchen table andthe apple inside the fridge”).Action prediction.VirtualHome features a large actionspace, and the set of valid actions changes as the agentmoves through and interacts with the environment. Eachaction consists of 1 verb and 1 object. In training, we maxi-mize the probabilities of the verb and object selected by anexpert action. To produce the verb probabilities, we pool theoutputs of the pre-trained LM and pass this “context feature”through a fully-connected layer as shown in Figure2.T odetermine the object probabilities, the model computes theinner product of the context feature with the LM output vec-tors corresponding to each object in the observation. Thisdesign automatically ﬁlters out objects that are not in the ob-servation and hence cannot be interacted with. In inference,we select the valid action with the highest joint probability1.at+1= arg max(at+1)2valid actionsp(at+1)(3)4.2. Policy Learning on BabyAIWe further evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed methodonBabyAI(Hui et al.,2020). BabyAI contains program-matically generated natural language instructions, e.g. “putthe green ball next to the box on your right” and requiresthe agent to navigate the world and move objects to targetlocations. BabyAI provides demos for 19 tasks of increasingdifﬁculty for testing imitation learning and reinforcementlearning algorithms. In our experiments, we compare the1We assume that when constrained to valid actions, the modeof the product distribution (of verb⇥object) is the same as themode of their joint distribution.Tokenization
Context featurefcHistoryht<walk> [kitchen]…<put> [apple] <in> [cabinet]
Cross-entropy lossCross-entropy lossAverage PoolingF!F!F!TokenizationINSIDE(pancake, fridge):2…ON(apple, table):1GoalgTokenizationagentkitchenapplefridgecabinetPartial observation ot
Object embeddings………F!F!F!F!F!FCFC
FCIntermediate valuesVerb probabilitiesOutput actionTrainingInferenceObject probabilitiesPre-trained Language Model(",$,%)FC(",$,%)FC
…<>Inner product<>Fine-tunedTrained from scratch
argmaxFigure 2:Policy network in VirtualHome.The objects in thecurrent observation, the goal predicates, and history actions areﬁrst converted into tokens sequences and then passed through anembedding layerF✓. The observation embeddings are reﬁnedby incorporating information about the state and position of eachobject. The combined sequence is passed through a pre-trainedlanguage model, and the output tokens are pooled into a contextfeature vector, which is then used for action prediction.proposed method and baselines on four representative tasks:GoToRedBall,GoToLocal,PickupLoc, andPutNextLocal.In our proposed method, we convert the observation into7⇥7text descriptions,e.g. “purple ball”, “grey wall”, “opendoor”, and combine them into a long sentence. We then con-vert the history actions into text descriptions,e.g. “turnleft” and “go forward”. We combine the language instruc-tion (without modiﬁcation) with the observation and historytext descriptions, and feed them to the pre-trained languagemodel to predict actions using the framework described inFigure1(right).5. Experiments5.1. Experiments on VirtualHome5.1.1. EVA L UAT I O NMETRICSWe build three test sets that evaluate policies’ ability fromthree aspects: (1) performance on in-distribution tasks; (2)generalization to novel scenes; and (3) generalization tonovel tasks. (SeeAppendixEfor more details.)In-Distribution.The predicate types and their counts arerandomly sampled based on the same distribution as thetraining data. There are2⇠10predicates in each task. Theobjects are initially placed in the environment according tocommon-sense layouts; (e.g. plates appear inside the kitchencabinets rather than the bathtub). Even goal predicates areOutput action:Figure 6: Policy network in VirtualHome. The observation, goal, and history are ﬁrst converted into sequences
and then passed through an embedding layer F. The combined sequence is passed through a pre-trained LM,
and the output tokens are pooled into a context feature vector for action prediction.
Observation Space. The observation in VirtualHome by default is a graph describing a list of objects
and their relations in the current partial observation. Each object has an object name, a state, e.g.
open, close, clean , and 3D coordinates.
Action Space. Agents can navigate in the environment and interact with objects. To interact with an
object, the agent must predict an action name and the index of the interested object, e.g.Open(5) to
opening the object with index (5). The agent can only interact with objects that are in the current
observation or execute the navigation actions, such as Walk(bathroom) . For some actions, such
asopen , the agent must be close to the object. There are also strict preconditions for actions, e.g.
the agent must grab an object before it can putthe object on a target position. As a result of these
constraints, the subset of actions available to the agent changes at every timestep.
We evaluate the success rates of different methods on VirtualHome. A given episode is scored as
successful if the policy completes its entire goal within Tsteps, where T= 70 is the maximum
allowed steps of the environment.
B.2 BabyAI
BabyAI is a 2D grid world environment designed to evaluate instruction following. Different from
VirtualHome, the observation in BabyAI by default is a 77grid describing a partial and local
egocentric view of the state of the environment. Each tile in the grid contains at most one object,
encoded using 3 integer values: one for the object type, one for the object color, and a state for doors
indicating whether it is open, closed or locked. The goals in BabyAI are language instructions, e.g.
“put the blue key next to the purple ball”. BabyAI has 7 actions, e.g. “turn left”, “pick up”, and “drop”.
C More implementation Details of LID in VirtualHome
In Appendix C.1, we provide more details of the model architecture used in the main paper Section 4.1.
We then introduce the training detail in Appendix C.2.
16
fcObservation otHistoryhtGoalgF𝜃F𝜃FCFCFCName(e.g.“kitchen oven”)StatevectorPositionvectorFCFCFCF𝜃
FCToken sequenceF𝜃Avg poolConcatenateFor each object in ot
FC(𝑥,𝑦,𝑧)(𝑥,𝑦,𝑧)TokenizationReLUFigure 7: Object encoding. In VirtualHome, the partial observation of the environment state can be represented
as a list of objects in the agent’s view. Each object is represented by a name, a state vector, and position
vector. Object name encoding: each object’s name is an English phrase. We tokenize the phrase, embed the
tokens, and average the embeddings. Object state encoding: each object is assigned one of six states: “clean”,
“closed”, “off”, “on”, “open”, or “none”. This state is represented as a 6-dimensional binary vector and passed
through a fully-connected layer. Object position encoding: an object’s position vector is a 6-dimensional
vector containing its world coordinates alongside its displacement to the agent ( i.e. the difference in their
world coordinates). This position vector is passed through two fully-connected layers. These three features are
concatenated and passed through a fully-connected layer to obtain the representation of an object in the current
observation.
C.1 Model architecture details in VirtualHome
In this section, we provide more details of the policy network we used in VirtualHome. Our policy
model consists of three parts, i.e. inputs, the pre-trained LM, and outputs. As shown Figure 6, we
encode the inputs to the policy—including goal g, historyht, and the current partial observation ot—
as sequences of embeddings. These embeddings are passed to the LM (using its pre-trained embedding
layerF) and used to obtain contextualized token representations. These token representations are
averaged to generate a context feature fc, which is then passed to fully-connected layer to predict the
next actionat. The output action in VirtualHome consists of a verb and an object. For brevity, we
omit the time subscript tfrom now on.
In VirtualHome, the partial observation oof the environment state can be represented as a list of
objects in the agent’s view. We represent each object by its name, e.g. “oven”, a state description,
e.g. “open, clean”, and position both in the world and relative to the agent. In this part, we provide
more details of how LID-Text (Ours) encodes the name, state, and position of each object in the
observation. Figure 7 shows the model architecture we used to encode the observation.
Name encoding. For each object node, we serialize its object name as an English phrase so. We
extract its tokens and features using the tokenizer and the embedding layer of the pre-trained LM,
respectively. Since one object name might generate several English tokens using the tokenizer from
the pre-trained LM, e.g. the tokens of “kitchencabinet” is [15813;6607;16212;500], we take the
averaged features of all the tokens in the object name and obtain a “name” feature fo;name
i for each
object node as shown in Figure 7.
State encoding. Some objects have a state description, e.g. “oven: open, clean”. There are six types
of object states in the environment: “clean”, “closed”, “off”, “on”, “open”, and “none”. For each
object node, we use a binary vector to represent its state. Taking the “oven” as an example, if the oven
is open and clean, its state vector would be [1;0;0;0;1;0]. This state vector is then passed through a
fully-connected layer to generate a state feature fo;state
i of objectoi.
Position encoding. To encode the position information of each object oi, we take their world
coordinatesfoi;x;oi;y;oi;zgand their spatial distance to the agent fax;ay;azgto generate a position
vector [oi;x;oi;y;oi;z;oi;x ax;oi;y ay;oi;z az]. This position vector is then passed through two
fully-connected layers with a ReLU layer in the middle to generate a position feature fo;position
i of
objectoi.
17
The ﬁnal feature fo
iof each object node is obtained by passing the concatenation of its name feature
fo;name
i , state feature fo;state
i , and position feature fo;position
i through a fully connected layer. The
observation at a single step can be written as a set of features ffo
1;;fo
Ng, whereNis the number
of objects in the current observation.
C.2 Training details
Our proposed approach and baselines are trained on Tesla 32GB GPUs. We train every single model
on 1 Tesla 32GB GPU. All experiments used the AdamW optimizer with the learning rate of 10 5.
We utilize a standard pre-trained language model, GPT-2, in our experiments. GPT-2 is trained on the
Webtext dataset [34] using the Huggingface library [46].
D Interactive Evaluation
The algorithm for interactive evaluation is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Interactive evaluation
A set of task goals G(each goal has a corresponding initial state);
Load the learned policy ;
Successful trajectory count: n= 0;
forexample=1,Ntestdo
Sample a goal gand the an initial state;
fort= 0;Tdo
Sample an action atfrom policy(atjg;ht;ot);
Execute the action atand get a new observation ot+1;
ifsuccess then
n=n+ 1;
break;
end
end
end
success rate: r=n=N test;
E Data Gathering Details in VirtualHome
In this section, we provide more data gathering details in VirtualHome for training the decision-
making policies. We introduce the expert data collection and active data gathering in Appendix E.1
and Appendix E.2, respectively.
E.1 Expert Data Collection
VirtualHome-Imitation Learning Dataset. To train the models, we collect a set of expert trajec-
tories in VirtualHome using regression planning (RP) [ 20]. We follow the implementation of the
regression planner used in [ 32]. Given a task described by goal predicates, the planner generates
an action sequence to accomplish this task. As shown in Figure 8, the agent has a belief about the
environment, i.e. an imagined distribution of object locations. As the agent explores the environment,
its belief of the world becomes closer to the real world. At every step, the agent updates its belief
based on the latest observation (see [ 32]), ﬁnds a new plan using the regression planner, and executes
the ﬁrst action of the plan. If the subtask (described by the goal predicate) has been ﬁnished, the agent
will select a new unﬁnished subtask, otherwise, the agent will keep doing this subtask until it ﬁnishes.
Similarly to previous work [ 40,39,32], we generate training data using a planner that has access
to privileged information, such as full observation of the environment and information about the
pre-conditions and effects of each action. The planner allows an agent to robustly perform tasks in
partially observable environments and generate expert trajectories for training and evaluation. We
generate 20;000trajectories for training and 3;000trajectories for validation. Each trajectory has a
goal, an action sequence, and the corresponding observations after executing each action.
18
Goal:INSIDE(plate, dishwasher): 1; ON(plate, table): 1Selected an unfinished goal predicate:INSIDE(plate, dishwasher): 1
Partial observationExecute the first action
Belief graphRegression plannerPut glass1.walk.plate2.grab.plate3.walk.dishwasherFigure 8: Regression planner . Given a task described by goal predicates, the planner generates an action
sequence to accomplish this task. The agent has a belief about the environment, i.e. an imagined distribution
of object locations. As the agent explores the environment, its belief of the world becomes closer to the real
world. At every step, the agent updates its belief based on the latest observation, ﬁnds a new plan using the
regression planner, and executes the ﬁrst action of the plan. If the subtask (described by the goal predicate) has
been ﬁnished, the agent will select a new unﬁnished subtask, otherwise, the agent will keep doing this subtask
until ﬁnish it.
E.2 Active Data Gathering
The algorithm for active data gathering is shown in Algorithm 2. To sample the goal and initial state,
we ﬁrst generate a set of initial states in VirtualHome using the code released by [ 32]. For each initial
state, we are able to get a set of feasible tasks that can be accomplished in this environment. For
example, in an initial state, if the apple is on the kitchen table, a feasible task goal could be “put the
apple inside the fridge”. In contrast, “put the banana inside the fridge” is not a feasible task if there is
no banana in the initial state.
We collect 9893 initial states, and randomly sample an initial state and its feasible goal every time
when we reset the environment. After each data collection iteration, we obtain a set of new goals
using the goal relabel function. We save the goal and its corresponding initial state in the replay
buffers and use the same strategy to sample the goal and initial state in the next iteration.
The hindsight relabeling stage is the key component for active data gathering. Here we provide
more implementation details of how we relabel “failed” trajectories with new goals in the hindsight
relabeling stage. For each “failed” trajectory, we extract its useful sub-trajectories and relabel a task
goalg0for it. We design a goal relabel function flthat generates a goal based on the sequence of
observations and actions. To do this, we ﬁrst use a hand-designed program to detect what tasks are
contained in a “failed” trajectory. This program ﬁnd useful tasks based on the keywords in the action
list. For example in Figure 9, the program knows the trajectory containing a task of “ On(apple,
kitchen table):1 ” based on the action “ [put]<apple><kitchentable> ”.
The selected sub-trajectories are not always optimal. We thus design a rule to ﬁlter out bad trajectories,
i.e. for trajectories with the same goal, selecting the “shorter” ones. One example is shown in
Figure 10. Suppose that there are two trajectories having the same goal, e.g. “On(apple, kitchen
table):1 ”. The ﬁrst trajectory has actions that are redundant or not related to the task, such as
“[walk ]<bathroom> ” and “ [walk ]<kitchen> ” while the second trajectory is more optimal
given the goal. We select the second trajectory and delete the ﬁrst trajectory from the replay buffer.
Note that the “shorter” does not mean fewer actions, but fewer actions that are not related to the task.
Thehindsight relabeling stage allows sample-efﬁcient learning by reusing the failure cases. The
relabeled data are used to train policies in the policy update stage.
19
Algorithm 2: Active Data Gathering
Given: a goal relabel function fl;
Initialize: policy; goal setG; training replay buffer Rtrain =fg; validation replay buffer Rval=fg;
foriteration=1, Ndo
forexample=1,Mdo
Sample a goal gfromGand an initial state s1;
fort= 1;Tdo
Sample an action from policy (atjg;ht;ot)or sample an action randomly;
Executeatand obtain a new observation ot+1;
end
Store the trajectory (o1;a1;;oT;aT;g)in the replay buffer Rtrain orRval;
end
Relabel each failure trajectory d= (o1;a1;;oT;aT)in the replay buffers and get new goal
g0=fl(d);
Put new goals g0in the goal set G;
fork= 1;Kdo
repeat
Sample data fromRtrain and update policy ;
until training episode ends ;
Get validation accuracy using the data from Rval;
end
=val_best
end
Interacted objectsNavigation trajectoryUseful sub-trajectory for hindsight relabeling
…   [walk] <kitchen>; [walk] <kitchentable1>; … ; [walk]< kitchentable>; [put] <apple> <kitchentable>;  [walk] <bedroom>; …Extract the useful sub-trajectory and relabel a task goal:Action generated by the current policy or random exploration:[walk] <kitchen> [walk] <kitchen cabinet 1> [open] <kitchen cabinet 1> [walk] <kitchen cabinet 2> [open] <kitchen cabinet 2> [grab] <apple>[walk] <kitchentable>[put] <apple> <kitchentable>[walk] <bedroom> …On (apple, kitchen table): 1
Figure 9: We ﬁrst use a hand-designed program to detect what tasks are contained in the collected trajectory.
This program ﬁnd tasks based on the keywords in the action list. For example, the program knows the
trajectory containing a task of “ On(apple, kitchen table):1 ” based on the action “ [put]< apple ><
kitchentable> ”. Then the program extracts all previous actions related to this task using hand-designed rules.
F Test Sets in VirtualHome
In this section, we provide more details of each test set. We ﬁrst introduce the test sets used for
evaluating the proposed model trained on expert data, i.e.LID, in Section F.1. We then show the test
sets used for evaluating the proposed model with active data gathering, i.e.LID-ADG, in Section F.2.
F.1 LID Test Sets
In Section 6.1, we compared the proposed method and baselines trained on expert data. In Table 7,
we provide a detailed description of each test subset, including the count of goal predicate types and
the number of goal predicates in each task. The In-Distribution setting has 37 goal predicates in
total and each task has 210goal predicates. The tasks are drawn from the same distribution as the
training tasks. The Novel Scenes setting also has 37 goal predicates and each task has 210goal
predicates. The objects are randomly placed in the initial environment. The Novel Tasks setting has
22 goal predicates in total and each task has 28goal predicates. The tasks are never seen during
training.
20
Goal:On (apple,  kitchen table): 1Action list 1:…  [walk] <livingroom>; [grab] <apple>; [walk] <kitchen>;[walk] <bathroom>; [walk] <kitchen>;[put] <apple> <kitchentable> …Action list 2:… [walk] <livingroom>; [grab] <apple>; [walk] <kitchen>; [put] <apple> <kitchentable> …Figure 10: Suppose there are two trajectories having the same goal, e.g. “On(apple, kitchen table):1 ”.
The ﬁrst trajectory has actions that are redundant or not related to the task, such as “ [walk]<bathroom> ”
and “[walk]<kitchen> ” while the second trajectory is more optimal given the goal. We select the second
trajectory and delete the ﬁrst trajectory from the replay buffer. Note that the “shorter” does not mean fewer
actions, but fewer actions that are not related to the task.
Table 7: Test sets used for evaluating the proposed model trained on the expert data. We show the count
of goal predicate types and the number of goal predicates used in each task.
Test Sets Predicate Types #Predicate Per Task Compared with the training set
In-Distribution 37 210 Tasks are drawn from the same distribution as training tasks.
Novel Scenes 37 210 The objects are randomly placed in the initial environment.
Novel Tasks 22 28 Tasks are never seen during training.
F.2 LID-ADG Test Sets
As we have mentioned in the main paper Section 9, one limitation of active data gathering is that it
relies on hand-designed rules for task relabeling. In addition, it is sometimes challenging to deﬁne
effective rules to extract useful sub-trajectories and get high-quality hindsight labels, especially when
trajectories are long and tasks become more complex. Thus we only relabel short sub-trajectories,
where the goal consists of a single goal predicate, e.g. “On(apple, kitchen table):1 ”. During
testing, we evaluate the success rate of approaches on solving such tasks as well, i.e. the count of
the goal predicate equals to 1. The types of goal predicates are the same as Section F.1, i.e. 37 goal
predicates in the In-Distribution setting and the Novel Scenes setting, and 22 goal predicates in the
Novel Tasks setting.
G Visualization of Attention Weights
To better understand how does LM pre-trained policies make decisions, we visualize the attention
weights from the self-attention layers of GPT-2 [ 43] in Figure 11 and Figure 12. In the inference time,
when we are decoding the actions, we save the self-attention weights with respect to different layers
and different heads. Then, we use BertViz library [ 44] to visualize normalized attention weights. We
show the attention weights from the input to the output of LID-Text (Ours) . The order of tokens in
the input and ouput is observation, goal, and history. In Figure 11 and Figure 12, the left side is the
query side. The boldness of the lines is proportional with the attention weight.
Figure 11 illustrates the attention weights of a layer named “Head 3 Layer 2”. We show attention
weights on two different tasks. We ﬁnd that “Head 3 Layer 2” can capture objects in the goal
predicates, such as “wineglass” and “cutleryfork” in the left ﬁgure, and “pancake” and “chicken” in
the right ﬁgure (the ﬁgures are cropped for visualization).
Figure 12 illustrates the attention weights of layers named “Head 1 Layer 2” (left) and “Head 4 Layer
11” (right). Given the goal predicates, history, and the current observation, the policy predicts the next
action as “grab milk”. We ﬁnd that “Head 1 Layer 2” is able to capture objects in the goal predicates,
such as “milk”, “pancake”, and “chicken” while “Head 4 Layer 11” focuses on the interacted object
in the predicted action, such as “milk”.
The attention weights from different self-attention layers are signiﬁcantly different—some self-
attention layers assign high attention weight to objects in the goal predicates while some layers focus
on the interacted object. There are also some layers that do not have interpretable meanings. The
21
attention weights just provide us an intuition of how does the internal language model works, more
quantiﬁed results are reported in the main paper.
Goal:INSIDE (cutleryfork, dishwasher): 3ON (wineglass, sink): 2INSIDE (waterglass, dishwasher): 1CLOSE (dishwasher)TURNON (dishwasher)
Goal:INSIDE (pancake, microwave): 1ON (chicken, kitchentable): 2ON (milk, kitchentable): 1CLOSE (microwave)TURNON (microwave)
Figure 11: Attention weights of a layer named “Head 3 Layer 2”. We show attention weights on two
different tasks. We ﬁnd that “Head 3 Layer 2” is able to capture objects in the goal predicates, such as “wineglass”
and “cutleryfork” in the left ﬁgure, and “pancake” and “chicken” in the right ﬁgure (the ﬁgures are cropped for
visualization).
22
Goal:INSIDE (pancake, microwave): 1ON (chicken, kitchentable): 2ON (milk, kitchentable): 1CLOSE (microwave)TURNON (microwave)Action:[grab] <milk>Goal:INSIDE (pancake, microwave): 1ON (chicken, kitchentable): 2ON (milk, kitchentable): 1CLOSE (microwave)TURNON (microwave)Action:[grab] <milk>Figure 12: Attention weights of layers named “Head 1 Layer 2” (left) and “Head 4 Layer 11” (right).
Given the goal predicates, history, and the current observation, the policy model predicts the next action as “grab
milk”. We ﬁnd that “Head 1 Layer 2” can capture objects in the goal predicates, such as “milk”, “pancake”, and
“chicken” while “Head 4 Layer 11” focuses on the interacted object in the predicted action, such as “milk”.
23