Title: Robotic Skill Acquisition via Instruction Augmentation with Vision-Language Models

Robotic Skill Acquisition via Instruction
Augmentation with Vision-Language Models
Ted Xiao1;Harris Chan1;2;Pierre Sermanet1Ayzaan Wahid1Anthony Brohan1
Karol Hausman1Sergey Levine1Jonathan Tompson1
1Robotics at Google2University of Toronto
Project website: https://instructionaugmentation.github.io
Step 1: Fine-tune VLM on a small dataset of crowd-sourced natural language descriptions 
Step 2: Label the instructions in a larger dataset using the fine-tuned VLM Training with DIALInitialFinal
InitialFinalDataset B (large)Dataset A (small)
a1…aN“Lift up the green chip bag from the bowl and drop it at the bottom left corner of the table”Dataset A(small)Dataset B (large)Dataset C (relabeled B)Step 3: Train a language conditioned policy using behavior cloning with original and relabeled datasetVLM“Pick up a coke can from the table”VLMVLMCrowd-sourcedAnnotations
“Pick up a coke can from the table”“Pick up a coke can from the table”“Pick up a coke can from the table”UnpairedCrowd-sourced & LLMs Annotations InitialFinalPredicted Descriptions
Dataset C (relabeled B)
Pepper the aussie pupPepper the aussie pupPepper the aussie pup+Inference
“Move the right apple to the left of the counter”
Step 4: Run trained policy on unseen instructionsTime
…
“Lift up the green chip bag from the bowl and drop it at the bottom left corner of the table”
Fig. 1: DIAL consists of three steps: (1) Contrastive ﬁne-tuning of a vision-language model (VLM) such as CLIP [ 39] on a
small dataset of robot manipulation trajectories with crowd-sourced natural language annotation, (2) labeling a larger dataset of
trajectories using the ﬁne-tuned VLM (in dashed outline), and (3) training a language-conditioned policy using behavior cloning
on the original and relabeled dataset. We evaluate the trained policy on unseen instructions. See Section III for more details.
Abstract —Robotic manipulation policies that follow natural
language instructions are typically trained from corpora of
robot-language data that were either collected with speciﬁc
tasks in mind or expensively relabeled by humans with varied
language descriptions in hindsight. Recently, large-scale pre-
trained vision-language models (VLMs) have been applied to
robotics for learning representations and scene descriptors. Can
these pretrained models serve as automatic labelers for robot
data, effectively importing Internet-scale knowledge into existing
datasets with limited ground truth annotations? For example, if
the original annotations contained templated task descriptions
such as “pick apple”, a pretrained VLM-based labeler could
signiﬁcantly expand the number of semantic concepts available
in the data and introduce spatial concepts such as “the apple
on the right side of the table” or alternative phrasings such
as “the red colored fruit”. To accomplish this, we introduce
Data-driven Instruction Augmentation for Language-conditioned
Equal contributioncontrol (DIAL): we utilize semi-supervised language labels to
propagate CLIP’s semantic knowledge onto large datasets of un-
labeled demonstration data, from which we then train language-
conditioned policies. This method enables cheaper acquisition of
useful language descriptions compared to expensive human labels,
allowing for more efﬁcient label coverage of large-scale datasets.
We apply DIAL to a challenging real-world robotic manipulation
domain where only 3.5% of the 80,000 demonstrations contain
crowd-sourced language annotations. Through a large-scale study
of over 1,300 real world evaluations, we ﬁnd that DIAL enables
imitation learning policies to acquire new capabilities and gen-
eralize to 60 novel instructions unseen in the original dataset.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Advances in deep learning architectures have made it possi-
ble to train end-to-end robotic control policies for following a
wide range of textual instructions, often by integrating state-arXiv:2211.11736v3  [cs.RO]  1 Jul 2023
of-the-art language embeddings and pretrained encoders with
imitation learning on top of large, manually collected datasets
of robotic demonstrations annotated with text commands [ 24].
However the performance of such methods is critically de-
pendent on the quantity and breadth of instruction-labeled
demonstration data that is available [ 32], and producing expert
demonstrations of robot motion often requires expertise and
time [ 33]. Can we squeeze more generalization capacity out
of a given set of demonstrations, with minimal additional
human effort? The key observation we make is that a given
demonstration might illustrate more than one behavior – e.g., a
motion that picks up the leftmost can in Figure 1 is an example
of how to pick up a coke can, the left can in a row of three, a
ﬁrst step toward clearing the table, and more. Can we leverage
this observation to relabel a given demonstration dataset to
enable a robot to master a broader range of semantic behaviors,
and can we do this in a largely automated and scalable way?
One possibility is to leverage large-scale pretrained lan-
guage models (LLMs) [ 9,15] and vision-language models
(VLMs) [ 2,39], which can be pretrained on Internet-scale data
and then be applied to downstream domains. In robotics, they
have been used as representations for perception [ 37,42], as
task representation for language [ 24,30], or as planners [ 1,22].
In contrast, we seek to apply pretrained VLMs to the datasets
themselves: can we use VLMs for instruction augmentation ,
where we relabel existing ofﬂine trajectory datasets with
additional language instructions?
In this work, we introduce Data-driven Instruction
Augmentation for Language-conditioned Control (DIAL), a
method that performs instruction augmentation with pretrained
VLMs to weakly relabel ofﬂine control datasets. We implement
an instantiation of our method with CLIP [ 39] on a challenging
real-world robotic manipulation setting with 80,000 teleop-
erated demonstrations, which include 2,800 demonstrations
that are labeled by crowd-sourced language annotators. By
performing a large quantitative evaluation of over 1,300 real
world robot evaluations, we compare our method with baselines
and instruction augmentation methods that are not visually
grounded. We ﬁnd that DIAL enables policies to acquire
understanding of new concepts not contained in the original
task labels and improving performance on 60 novel evaluation
instructions by over 41%. Sample emergent capabilities of our
method are shown in Figure 5.
II. R ELATED WORK
a) Language instruction following in robotics: Language-
instruction following agents have been extensively explored
with engineered symbolic representations [ 17,45], with rein-
forcement learning (RL) [ 5,20,29], and with imitation learning
[3,6,24,30]. Recent advances in deep learning with large
amounts of data have led to advances in methods for learning
instruction-conditioned policies [ 1,28,34,43,44]. Latent
Motor Policies (LMP) [ 31] learns hierarchical goal-conditioned
policies. Subsequent Language from Play (LfP) [ 30] uses
language goals provided by large dataset of hindsight human
labels on robotic play data. Similarly, Interactive Language [ 32]uses crowd-sourced hindsight labels on diverse demonstration
data for table-top object rearrangements. In contrast, our method
does not rely on crowd-sourced language labels at scale, but
instead leverages a modest number of language labels by using
a learned model to provide weak hindsight labeling for the
rest of the data.
b) Pretrained VLMs and LLMs for language-conditioned
control: Prior works have leveraged pretrained VLMs and
LLMs for language-conditioned control, as part of reward
modeling [ 18,36], as part of the agent architecture [ 37,42],
or as planners for long-horizon tasks [ 1,22,23]. MineCLIP
[18] ﬁne-tunes CLIP [ 39] encoders using a contrastive loss
on a large ofﬂine dataset of Minecraft videos and optimizes
a language-conditioned control policy on top of the ﬁnetuned
CLIP representations through online RL. LOReL [ 36] learns
a reward function from ofﬂine robot datasets with crowd
sourced annotations using a neural network trained from scratch
combined with a pretraind DistilBERT sentence embedding
[41] using a binary cross entropy loss. CLIPort [ 42] uses a
frozen CLIP vision and text encoders in combination with
Transporter networks [ 47] for imitation learning. R3M [ 37]
uses representations pretrained constrastively on Ego4D [ 21]
human video datasets for robotic policy learning via imitation
learning. For long-horizon language instructions, LLMs have
been used as planners both in simulated [ 22] and real-world
robotics settings [ 1]. Our approach ﬁne-tunes CLIP on our real
robot ofﬂine dataset and is used for instruction augmentation
for a behavior cloning agent, instead of directly using the CLIP
model as a reward model and optimizing an RL agent.
c) Hindsight relabeling for goal-conditioned reinforce-
ment learning: The relabeling approach for goal-conditioned
reinforcement learning [ 38] is used in tabular [ 26] and contin-
uous [ 4] settings, where the desired goals are relabeled with
achieved goals to generate positive examples in sparse reward
environments. This method has been applied to environments
with goals represented as images [ 12], task IDs [ 27], and lan-
guage instructions [ 11,13,25]. Previous works with language
goals used environment simulators [ 11,25] or learned models
[13,40] to provide hindsight labels. Our work introduces the
novel contribution of visual grounding by leveraging VLMs to
generate unstructured natural language relabeling instructions,
enabling scaling to complex real robot environments.
III. D ATA-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION AUGMENTATION FOR
LANGUAGE -CONDITIONED CONTROL
In this section, we describe our method, DIAL, which
consists of three stages: (1) ﬁne-tuning a VLM’s vision
and language representations on a small ofﬂine dataset of
trajectories with crowd-sourced episode-level natural language
descriptions, (2) generating alternative instructions for a larger
ofﬂine dataset of trajectories with the VLM, and (3) learning
a language-conditioned policy via behavioral cloning on this
instruction-augmented dataset.
A. Fine-tuning Vision-Language Model Representations
We ﬁrst collect a dataset of robot trajectories, from either
human teleoperated demonstrations on a wide variety of tasks
[1], or from unstructured robotic “play” data [ 31]. We partition
this dataset with uniform sampling into two subsets: a small
subset to be annotated by human annotators, and a much larger
subset to be labeled by the VLM ﬁnetuned on the former.
The smaller portion is selected because the process of human
labeling is time-consuming and requires signiﬁcant effort and
cost.
Let the small dataset of Ntrajectories be [1;:::;N],n=
([(sn
0;an
0);(sn
1;an
1);:::; (sn
T)]), wheresn
tandan
tdenote the
observed state and action, respectively, at time tfor then-th
episode. We then collect a corresponding natural language
annotationlnfor then-th episode describing what the robot
agent did in the episode via crowd-sourcing.
When producing these descriptions, the crowd-sourced
evaluators observe the ﬁrst frame, s0, and last frame, sT, from
the agent’s ﬁrst-person view. We refer to these instructions
ascrowd-sourced instructions . Together, we denote the ﬁrst
datasetDA= [(1;l1);:::; (N;lN)]as the paired trajectories
and crowd-sourced labels. Our method then ﬁne-tunes a vision
and language model representation on DA.
Motivated by promising results of CLIP in robotics in
prior works [ 35,42], our instantiation of DIAL uses CLIP
[39] for both instruction augmentation and task representa-
tion; nonetheless, other VLMs or captioning models could
also be used to propose instruction augmentations. Given
a batch of Binitial state s0, ﬁnal state sT, and crowd-
sourced instruction ltuple, the model is trained to predict
which of the B2(initial-ﬁnal state, crowd-sourced instruc-
tion) pairs co-occurred. We use CLIP’s Transformer-based
text encoder Tencto embed the crowd-sourced instruction
to a latent space zn
l=Tenc(ln)=kTenc(ln)k 2Rdand
CLIP’s Vision Transformer-based (ViT) [ 16] image encoder
Iencto embed the initial and ﬁnal state, and further con-
catenate these two embeddings and pass through a fully
connected neural network f, producing the vision embedding
zn
s=f([Ienc(sn
0);Ienc(sn
T)])=kf([Ienc(sn
0);Ienc(sn
T)])k2
Rd.B2similarity logits are formed by applying dot product
across all state-instruction pairs, and a symmetric cross entropy
loss term is calculated by applying softmax normalization with
temperature across the states and texts:
L= BX
n=1
logezn
lzn
s=
PB
k=1ezk
lzns=
+ logezn
lzn
s=
PB
k=1ezn
lzks=
B. Instruction Augmentation
In the larger partition of the original dataset, which we denote
as datasetDB, containsMNtrajectories [^1;:::; ^M],
where ^m= ([(^sm
0;^am
0);(^sm
1;^am
1);:::; (^sm
T)]). In contrast to
DA, we assume that trajectories in DBdo not have any
associated natural language labels.
We use the ﬁne-tuned VLM model to propose natural
language instructions ~lmfor each trajectory ^mto augment
DB. While ~lmcould be drawn from any reasonable corpus,
ourspeciﬁc instantiation of DIAL sources these candidate
instructions fromDAas well as additional instructions drawing
from GPT-3 [ 9]proposals of possible tasks, which we denote
ᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧDataset C (relabeled B)Dataset B (large)ᐧᐧᐧDataset A (small)ᐧᐧᐧ
Crowd-sourcedInstructionVLM-sourcedInstruction
TrajectoryᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧᐧDataset C (relabeled B)Dataset B (large)ᐧᐧᐧDataset A (small)ᐧᐧᐧ
Crowd-sourcedInstructionVLM-sourcedInstruction
TrajectoryFig. 3: The construction of datasets: Dataset A ( DA) (blue)
consists of the NtrajectoriesfngN
n=1labeled with crowd-
sourced instructions flngN
n=1describing what the robot agent
performed in the episode. Dataset B ( DB) (yellow) consists
of a much larger set of trajectories, f^mgM
m=1without crowd-
sourced instructions. Dataset C ( DC) (red, dashed) contains
Dataset B trajectories relabeled with VLM-sourced hindsight
instruction(s)f~lm
1;:::; ~lm
kgM
m=1.
asDGPT  3(the details of this procedure will be covered in
Section IV-B ). We use the CLIP text encoder to independently
embed these candidate natural language instructions, i.e.
~lm2L=fl1;:::;lNgDA[DGPT  3:
fz1
l;:::;zN
lg=fTenc(l1);:::;Tenc(lN)g
Similarly, we use the ﬁne-tuned CLIP image encoder and MLP
fusion to embed the initial and ﬁnal observations from the
second dataset:
f^z1
s;:::; ^zM
sg=ff([Ienc(^si
0);Ienc(^si
T)])gM
i=1
With these embeddings pre-computed, we can retrieve
the most likely candidates using k-Nearest Neighbors [ 19]
with cosine similarity between the vision-language embed-
ding pairsd(zn
l;^zm
s) =zn
l^zm
s
kzn
l^zmskas the metric. We then
use the cosine similarity to select a subset of candidate
instructions to construct a new relabeled datasetDC=
[(^1;~l1
1);:::; (^1;~l1
k);:::; (^M;~lM
1);:::; (^M;~lM
k)]. Figure 3
visualizes the three datasets generated. There are several
potential strategies for candidate instruction selection:
a) Top-kselection: For each trajectory, we rank the
candidate instructions in descending order based on their
cosine similarity distances and output the top- kinstructions.
The hyperparameter ktrades off precision and recall of the
relabeled dataset. A smaller kwill return mostly relevant
candidate instructions, while a larger kvalue can recall a
broader spectrum of potential hindsight descriptions for the
episode at the expense of introducing erroneous instructions.
(b)
(c)“Pick up a coke can from the table”
“pick coke can” 
Crowdsourced LanguageAnnotations 
RGB image, 640 x 512
Frontal view,Pre-manipulation pose(a)Structured Teleoperator Instructions
Fig. 4: (a) A mobile manipulator robot receives RGB images from an onboard camera and uses a 7 DoF arm with parallel-jaw
grippers. (b) Teleoperators receive instructions drawn from a set of 551 structured commands to perform a total of 80,000
demonstrations. 2,800 of these episodes are sent for crowdsourced language annotations. (c) A sample of scenes in the
demonstration dataset which range across various countertops, drawers, and object arrangements in an ofﬁce kitchen setting.
b) Min-pselection: Instead of outputting a ﬁxed number
of candidate instructions per trajectory, we dynamically adjust
this number based on a minimum probability pparameter,
representing the minimum conﬁdence for each instruction. We
ﬁrst convert the cosine similarity between the vision-language
embedding pair to a probability that the m-th episode has
language label lnby taking the softmax over all the candidate
instructions with temperature parameter from CLIP:
P(~lm=lnj(^sm
0;^sm
T)) =exp(d(zn
l;^zm
s)=)P
n0exp(d(zn0
l;^zms)=)(1)
We truncate the candidate instructions to the set L(p)Lsuch
that each instruction has a minimum hurdle probability p>0:
P(~lm=l)p;8l2L(p)(2)
Givenp, the maximum number of candidates that can be
output for a trajectory is k= 1=p. The minimum number of
candidates, meanwhile, can be zero, if there are no candidate
instructions satisfying this hurdle probability.
We will investigate in Section V-C the effects of these
candidate instruction selection strategies on relabeled instruc-
tion accuracy, augmented dataset size, and downstream policy
performance.
C. Language Conditioned Policies with Behaviour Cloning
Given a datasetD= [DA;DC]of robot trajectories and
corresponding augmented language instructions, we can train
a language-conditioned control policy with Behavior Cloning
(BC). While instruction augmented ofﬂine datasets can be
used by any downstream language-conditioned policy learningmethod such as ofﬂine RL or BC, we limit our work to the
conceptually simpler BC in order to focus our analysis on the
importance of instruction augmentation.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
We ﬁrst describe the setup for our experimental validation,
including the environments, the conﬁguration of the robot,
and the datasets that we use in our experiments. Since our
aim is to study the beneﬁts of our proposed instruction
augmentation approach, we describe other alternative methods
for augmenting the dataset for comparison. Finally, we detail
our evaluation protocol, which involves testing the degree
to which policies learned with different types of instruction
augmentation generalize to novel previously unseen instructions.
A. Environment, Robot, and Datasets
We implement DIAL in a challenging real-world robotic ma-
nipulation setting based on the kitchen environments described
by Ahn et al. [1]. We focus on the practically-motivated setting
where a dataset of teleoperated demonstrations is available,
collected for downstream imitation learning [ 1,24]. A mobile
manipulator robot with a parallel-jaw gripper, an over-the-
shoulder RGB camera, and a 7 DoF arm is placed in an ofﬁce
kitchen to interact with common objects using concurrent [ 46]
continuous closed-loop control from pixels. We collect a large-
scale dataset of over 80,000 robot trajectories via human
teleoperation (DB), where teleoperators receive 551 structured
commands motivated by common manipulation skills and
objects in a kitchen environment, following prior work [ 1].
Afterwards, we leverage crowd-sourced human annotators to
label 2,800 robot trajectories with two hindsight instructions
each, resulting in a total of 5,600 unique episodes with
crowdsourced captions ( DA). Human annotators are shown
the ﬁrst and last frame of the episode and asked to provide a
free-form text description describing how a robot should be
commanded to go from the start to the end. Visualizations
of the mobile manipulator, dataset collection procedure, and
example scenes are shown in Figure 4 and further detailed in
Appendix B.
B. Instruction Augmentation
We consider various methods of instruction augmentation
which each result in different relabeled datasets that are then
used for downstream policy learning.
a) DIAL implementations: We implement DIAL with
a CLIP model that is ﬁne-tuned on DAwith the procedure
described in Section III-A . After ﬁne-tuning CLIP, we source
18,719 candidate instruction labels ( L) from the combination
ofDAand a corpus of GPT-3 proposals of potential language
instructions. To perform instruction augmentation that relabels
datasetDBof 80,000 robot trajectories that do not contain
crowd-sourced annotations with L, we follow Section III-B
to implement two variations of DIAL: Top-kselection and
Min-pselection .
The version of DIAL with Top-kselection applies a ﬁxed
numberkinstruction augmentations for every episode in
the source dataset based on cosine similarity distances. By
changing k, we produce three instruction augmented datasets:
80,000 relabeled demonstrations ( k= 1), 240,000 relabeled
demonstrations ( k= 3), and 800,000 relabeled demonstrations
(k= 10). The version of DIAL with Min-pselection is
more conservative and only performs instruction augmentation
when conﬁdence from CLIP is above some threshold p. By
changingp, we produce three instruction augmented datasets:
128,422 relabeled demonstrations ( p= 0.1), 38,516 relabeled
demonstrations ( p= 0.2), and 17,013 relabeled demonstrations
(p= 0.3). Additional details can be found in Appendix C.
b) Non-visual instruction augmentation methods: We
consider three instruction augmentation methods that do not
utilize any visual information. First, we implement a “Gaussian
Noise” baseline that adds random noise to existing crowd-
sourced instructions’ language embeddings. Second, we design
a “Word-level Synonyms” baseline that replaces individual
words in existing instructions with sampled synonyms from
a predeﬁned list. Finally, we introduce a “LLM-proposed
Instructions” baseline that replaces entire instructions with
alternative instructions as proposed by GPT-3. Implementation
details for these baselines can be found in Appendix E.
C. Policy Training
Using these various instruction augmented datasets, we train
vision-based language-conditioned behavioral cloning policies
with the RT-1 architecture [ 7]. One main difference from RT-1
is that instead of utilizing USE [ 10] as the task representation
for language conditioning, we instead use the language encoder
of the ﬁne-tuned CLIP model that was used for instructionCategory Instruction Samples
Spatial [‘knock down the right soda’,
‘raise the left most can’, ‘raise
bottle which is to the left of
the can’]
Rephrased [‘pick up the apple fruit’,
‘liftt the fruit’ [sic], ‘lift
the yellow rectangle’]
Semantic [‘move the lonely object to the
others’, ‘push blue chip bag
to the left side of the table’,
‘move the green bag away from the
others’]
TABLE I: Samples from the 60 novel evaluation instructions
we consider. 34 Spatial tasks focus on instructions involving
reasoning about spatial relationships, such as specifying an
object’s initial position relative to other objects in the scene.
16Rephrased tasks are linguistic re-phrasings of the original
551 foresight tasks, such as referring to sodas and chips by
their colors instead of their brand name. 10 Semantic tasks
describe skills not contained in the original dataset, such as
moving objects away from all other objects, since the original
dataset only contains trajectories of moving objects towards
other objects. A full list is provided in Table VII.
augmentation in Section III-B ; full details are described further
in Appendix G. Nonetheless, we treat the behavioral cloning
policy as an independent component of our method and focus
on studying instruction augmentation methods; we do not
explore different policy architectures or losses in this work.
D. Evaluation
In contrast to many prior works [ 3,6] on instruction
following, we focus our evaluation only on novel instructions
unseen during training . To source these novel instructions, we
crowd-source instructions and prompt GPT-3 for evaluation
task suggestions, and then ﬁlter out any instructions already
contained in either the crowd-sourced language instructions in
DA, the original set of 551 structured teleoperator commands
DB, or the instruction augmentated dataset DC; in total, we
sample 60 novel evaluation instructions. We organize these
evaluation instructions into three categories to allow for more
detailed analysis of qualitative policy performance; examples
are shown in Table I and a full list is provided in Table VII.
V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In our experiments, we investigate whether DIAL can
improve the policy performance on the unseen tasks described
in Section IV-D when starting from fully or partially labeled
source datasets. We ablate on the types of instruction augmen-
tations described in Section IV-B , and analyze the importance
of accuracy when augmenting instructions with DIAL.
A. Does DIAL improve performance on unseen tasks?
We investigate whether DIAL can enable language-
conditioned behavior cloning policies to successfully perform
Fig. 5: Given the same starting scene, DIAL follows the instructions of (a) pick can which is on the right of
the table , (b)pick the can in the middle , and (c) pick can which is on the left of the table .
Non-DIAL methods do not adjust their behaviors based on language commands, demonstrating a lack of spatial understanding.
novel instructions. For training various control policies, we
consider three training datasets: DAcontains 5,600 episodes
which contain crowd-sourced hindsight language instructions,
DBcontains 80,000 episodes which contain structured com-
mands given to teleoperators, and DCcontains 38,516 episodes
with instructions predicted by DIAL with Min- p= 0:2starting
fromDAandDB. We refer to training on only DAas the
Interactive Language (IL) [ 32] setting, training on only DB
as the RT-1 [ 7] setting, and training on both DAandDBas
the RT-1 + IL setting. Then, we refer training on DC(either
with or withoutDAandDB) as DIAL. This experiment is
practically motivated by the setting where large amounts of
unstructured trajectory data are available but hindsight labels
are expensive to collect, such as robot play data [ 14,31,32].
After policy training, we evaluate on task instructions not
contained inDA,DB, orDC. Table II demonstrates that DIAL
is able to solve over 40% more challenging novel tasks across
the three evaluation categories compared to either RT-1 and/or
IL, which do not use the instruction augmented data DC.
An example is shown in Figure 5, where DIAL successfully
understands the spatial concepts of “left”, “middle”, and “right”.
Such spatial concepts are especially important to identify object
instances in scenes with duplicate objects: while baseline
methods ignore the language instruction and instead repeat
the same motions or randomly select a target object, DIAL is
able to consistently target the correct objects. In addition to
Spatial tasks, DIAL is also able to outperform baseline policies
atSemantic tasks that focus on semantic skills not contained
in the original foresight instructions. We show more examples
of evaluation successes in Figure 8.Dataset Properties Evaluation on Novel Instructions
MethodDADBDC Spatial Rephrased Semantic Overall
IL [32] X 30:0% 40 :0% 7 :7% 27 :5%
RT-1 [7] X 38:0% 40 :0% 15 :4% 33 :8%
RT-1 + IL X X 46:0% 60 :0% 15 :4% 42 :5%
X X 58:0% 46 :7% 15 :4% 47 :5%
DIAL (ours) X X 50:0% 37 :5% 10 :0% 36 :7%
X X X 68:0%66:7% 30:8%60:0%
TABLE II: Comparing the performance of language-
conditioned policies trained on different types of labeled
datasets.DAcontains 5,600 episodes with crowd-sourced
language instructions and is representative of the Interactive
Language (IL) [ 32] setting.DBcontains 80,000 episodes with
structured teleoperator commands and is representative of the
RT-1 [ 7] setting. DIAL additionally creates an augmented DC
with 38,516 relabeled instructions. We ﬁnd that DIAL is able
to signiﬁcantly performance on novel evaluation instructions,
especially in the IL setting where DBis not available.
B. How does DIAL compare to other instruction augmentation
methods?
We compare DIAL to non-visual instruction augmen-
tation strategies outlined in Section IV-B . For this com-
parison, we apply the baseline instruction augmentation
methods on both episodes with crowd-sourced annota-
tions (DA) and on episodees with structured teleopera-
tor commands (DB) to produce different instruction aug-
Fig. 6: Comparing the task diversity of structured commands provided to teleoperators and DIAL instruction predictions. The
visualization shows a t-SNE for 30,000 trajectories with their ﬁrst and last frames embedded via a ﬁne-tuned CLIP model. On
the left, embeddings are colored based on the skill categories of structured teleoperator commands. On the right, embeddings
are colored based on particular keywords that are present in the DIAL predicted instructions. While large clusters of episodes
may all correspond to the same teleoperator command, DIAL predictions may highlight more nuanced semantic concepts.
Evaluation on Novel Instructions
Instruction AugmentationSpatial
TasksRephrased
TasksSemantic
Tasks Overall
None 46:0% 60 :0% 15 :4% 42 :5%
Gaussian Noise 36:0% 40 :0% 23 :1% 33 :8%
Word-level Synonyms 28:0% 46 :7% 7 :7% 27 :5%
LLM-proposed Instructions 28:0% 46 :7% 23 :1% 30 :0%
DIAL (ours) 68:0% 66:7% 30:8% 60:0%
TABLE III: Evaluating language-conditioned BC policies
trained on datasets with different types of instruction augmen-
tation. Each policy performs 80 evaluations over 60 novel task
instructions. DIAL is consistently most performant, especially
onSpatial Tasks requiring visual scene understanding.
mented datasets (DGaussian
C;DSynonyms
C;DLLM
C;DDIAL
C ). Af-
terwards, we train separate language-conditioned policies
policies: the “None” model trains on { DA;DB}, while the
remaining models train on { DA;DB;DC0} withDC0being
each of their respective instruction augmentated datasets.
Table III indicates that DIAL signiﬁcantly outperforms other
baseline instruction augmentation methods. For both the Spatial
Tasks and Rephrased tasks, we observe that these baseline
instruction augmentation methods without visual grounding
resulted in worse performance compared to the no instruction
augmentation.
C. How sensitive is DIAL to hyperparameters and instruction
prediction accuracy?
We study the trade-off between increasing the amount
of instruction augmentation and potentially relabeling with
Fig. 7: The factual accuracy of the top 20instruction aug-
mentation predictions of 50 sampled episodes relabeled by
a ﬁne-tuned CLIP model. For k2[1;20], we measure the
accuracy of the k-th instruction, the cumulative accuracy of
the topkinstructions, and CLIP’s conﬁdence score for the
k-th instruction. While top instructions are often accurate, they
become increasingly inaccurate along with CLIP’s conﬁdence.
incorrect or irrelevant instructions. By varying the hyper-
parameters of Top- kprediction and Min- pprediction, the
two instruction prediction variations of DIAL discussed in
Section IV-B , we can indirectly inﬂuence the size the potential
label inaccuracy of the relabeled datasets. To measure how
instruction augmentation accuracy changes as we increase k,
DIAL Version Dataset Properties Evaluation on Novel Instructions
Prediction MethodRelabeled
EpisodesRelabeled
AccuracySpatial
TasksRephrased
TasksSemantic
Tasks Overall
Top-k,k= 1 80 ;000 68 :0% 62 :0% 40 :0% 23 :1% 50 :0%
Top-k,k= 3 240 ;000 65 :3% 62 :0% 40 :0% 15 :4% 48 :8%
Top-k,k= 10 800 ;000 57 :0% 37 :5% 50 :0% 20 :0% 35 :0%
Min-p,p= 0:10 128 ;422 61 :9% 44 :0% 46 :7% 23 :1% 40 :0%
Min-p,p= 0:20 38 ;516 68 :8% 68:0% 66:7% 30:8% 60:0%
Min-p,p= 0:30 17 ;013 76 :0% 62 :0% 53 :3% 46 :2% 56 :3%
TABLE IV: Comparing DIAL with Top- kprediction against DIAL with Min- pprediction. By increasing kor decreasing p,
augmented datasets become larger but increasingly inaccurate. We provide analysis of the relationship between instruction
accuracy and CLIP conﬁdence in Figure 7 and Section V-C.
we ask human labelers to rate whether proposed instruction
augmentation are factually accurate descriptions of a given
episode. We show an example of the top 10 predicted instruction
augmentations in an episode in Figure 12.
In Figure 7, we sample 50 episodes and ask human labelers
to assess the predicted instruction accuracy as we increase the
number of predictions produced by CLIP. While the initial
predictions are often correct, the later predictions are often
factually inaccurate. The top-20th instruction prediction is only
factually accurate 20:0%of the time.
When applying these different relabeled datasets to down-
stream policy learning, we ﬁnd in Table IV that Min- p
instruction prediction, a more conservative approach than Top- k
prediction, performs the best across all evaluation instructions.
We also ﬁnd that ﬁnetuning CLIP is quite important for
instruction augmentation, which is detailed in Appendix A2.
VI. C ONCLUSION , LIMITATIONS ,AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we introduced DIAL, a method that uses
VLMs to label ofﬂine datasets for language-conditioned policy
learning. Scaling DIAL to a real world robotic manipulation
domain, we perform a large-scale study of over 1,300 evalua-
tions and ﬁnd that DIAL is able to outperform baselines by
40% on a challenging set of 60 novel evaluation instructions
unseen during training. We compare DIAL against instruction
augmentation methods that do not consider visual context,
and also ablate the source datasets we use for instruction
augmentation. Finally, we study the interplay between larger
augmented datasets and lowered instruction accuracy; we ﬁnd
that control policies are able to utilize relabeled demonstrations
even when some labels are inaccurate, suggesting that DIAL
is able to provide a cheap and automated option to extract
additional semantic knowledge from ofﬂine control datasets.
Limitations and Future Work: Although DIAL seems to
improve policy understanding on many novel concepts not
contained in the original training dataset, it sometimes fails,
especially when evaluating tasks that may require new motor
skills. In addition, since both our crowd-source annotators and
VLMs only have access to the ﬁrst and ﬁnal states of an episode,
“ p u sh t he c an t o w ar d s t he l e ft” 
“mo v e t he ri gh t ap p l e t o t he l e ft o f t he c o un t er” 
“lift t he y ell o w r e c t an gl e” 
“mo v e t he l o nely o b j e c t t o t he o t her s” 
“r ais e t he l e ft mo s t c an ” 
“ gr ab t he whi t e c an ” Fig. 8: DIAL successfully completes various novel evaluation
instructions requiring understanding of concepts such as
relative spatial references, colors, and alternative phrasings.
These concepts were not present in the structured teleoperator
commands used for the original training demonstrations.
they do not capture skills involving temporal coherence nor is
aware of how these instructions are accomplished. A natural
next step is to apply DIAL to full video episodes. Another
interesting direction is to view DIAL as goal-conditioning and
attempting visual goals during training or evaluation. Moreover,
on-policy or RL variations of DIAL may be able to effectively
explore the task representation space autonomously.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Kanishka Rao, Debidatta
Dwibedi, Pete Florence, Yevgen Chebotar, Fei Xia, and Corey
Lynch for valuable feedback and discussions. We would also
like to thank Emily Perez, Dee M, Clayton Tan, Jaspiar
Singh, Jornell Quiambao, and Noah Brown for navigating
the ever-changing challenges of data collection and robot
policy evaluation at scale. Additionally, Tom Small designed
informative animations to visualize DIAL. Finally, we would
like to thank the large team that built [ 8] and [ 1], upon which
we develop DIAL.
REFERENCES
[1]Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen
Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn,
Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman,
Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian
Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano,
Kyle Jeffrey, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian,
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada,
Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Jarek
Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Siev-
ers, Clayton Tan, Alexander Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke,
Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan
Yan, and Andy Zeng. Do As I Can, Not As I Say:
Grounding Language in Robotic Affordances. In 6th
Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=bdHkMjBJG_w.
[2]Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, An-
toine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc,
Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al.
Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198 , 2022.
[3]Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark
Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen Gould, and
Anton Van Den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation:
Interpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in
real environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3674–
3683, 2018.
[4]Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas
Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew,
Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba.
Hindsight experience replay. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , 30, 2017.
[5]Dzmitry Bahdanau, Felix Hill, Jan Leike, Edward Hughes,
Arian Hosseini, Pushmeet Kohli, and Edward Grefenstette.
Learning to understand goal speciﬁcations by modelling
reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01946 , 2018.
[6]Valts Blukis, Yannick Terme, Eyvind Niklasson, Ross A
Knepper, and Yoav Artzi. Learning to map natural
language instructions to physical quadcopter control using
simulated ﬂight. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09664 , 2019.
[7]Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yev-
gen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, KeerthanaGopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine
Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson,
Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-
nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee,
Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deeksha Manjunath,
Igor Mordatch, Oﬁr Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn
Peralta, Emily Perez, Karl Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao,
Kanishka Rao, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag
Sanketi, Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke,
Austin Stone, Clayton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent Van-
houcke, Steve Vega, Quan Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao,
Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich.
Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale.
InarXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022.
[8]Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yev-
gen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana
Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine
Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world
control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022.
[9]Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:
1877–1901, 2020.
[10] Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua,
Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St John, Noah Constant, Mario
Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, et al. Universal
sentence encoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11175 , 2018.
[11] Harris Chan, Yuhuai Wu, Jamie Kiros, Sanja Fidler,
and Jimmy Ba. Actrce: Augmenting experience via
teacher’s advice for multi-goal reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04546 , 2019.
[12] Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Yao Lu, Ted Xiao,
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jake Varley, Alex Irpan, Benjamin
Eysenbach, Ryan Julian, Chelsea Finn, et al. Actionable
models: Unsupervised ofﬂine reinforcement learning of
robotic skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07749 , 2021.
[13] Geoffrey Cideron, Mathieu Seurin, Florian Strub, and
Olivier Pietquin. Higher: Improving instruction following
with hindsight generation for experience replay. In 2020
IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
(SSCI) , pages 225–232. IEEE, 2020.
[14] Zichen Jeff Cui, Yibin Wang, Nur Muhammad, Lerrel
Pinto, et al. From play to policy: Conditional behavior
generation from uncurated robot data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.10047 , 2022.
[15] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018.
[16] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov,
Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold,
Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020.
[17] Felix Duvallet, Thomas Kollar, and Anthony Stentz.
Imitation learning for natural language direction following
through unknown environments. In 2013 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages
1047–1053. IEEE, 2013.
[18] Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar,
Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang, De-An Huang,
Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building
open-ended embodied agents with internet-scale knowl-
edge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08853 , 2022.
[19] Evelyn Fix and Joseph Lawson Hodges. Discrimina-
tory analysis. nonparametric discrimination: Consistency
properties. International Statistical Review/Revue Inter-
nationale de Statistique , 57(3):238–247, 1989.
[20] Justin Fu, Anoop Korattikara, Sergey Levine, and Sergio
Guadarrama. From language to goals: Inverse rein-
forcement learning for vision-based instruction following.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.07742 , 2019.
[21] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne,
Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Girdhar, Jackson
Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al.
Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric
video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 18995–
19012, 2022.
[22] Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and
Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot planners:
Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07207 , 2022.
[23] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky
Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan Tompson,
Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue:
Embodied reasoning through planning with language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608 , 2022.
[24] Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler,
Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic
imitation learning. In Conference on Robot Learning ,
pages 991–1002. PMLR, 2022.
[25] Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy,
and Chelsea Finn. Language as an abstraction for
hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 32, 2019.
[26] Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In
IJCAI , volume 2, pages 1094–8. Citeseer, 1993.
[27] Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jacob Varley, Yevgen Chebotar,
Benjamin Swanson, Rico Jonschkowski, Chelsea Finn,
Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Mt-opt: Continuous
multi-task robotic reinforcement learning at scale. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.08212 , 2021.
[28] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol
Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng.
Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied
control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07753 , 2022.
[29] Jelena Luketina, Nantas Nardelli, Gregory Farquhar,Jakob Foerster, Jacob Andreas, Edward Grefenstette,
Shimon Whiteson, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of
reinforcement learning informed by natural language.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03926 , 2019.
[30] Corey Lynch and Pierre Sermanet. Language conditioned
imitation learning over unstructured data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.07648 , 2020.
[31] Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar,
Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and Pierre Sermanet.
Learning latent plans from play. In Conference on robot
learning , pages 1113–1132. PMLR, 2020.
[32] Corey Lynch, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Tianli
Ding, James Betker, Robert Baruch, Travis Armstrong,
and Pete Florence. Interactive language: Talking to robots
in real time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06407 , 2022.
[33] Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush
Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio
Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martín-Martín. What
matters in learning from ofﬂine human demonstrations
for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298 ,
2021.
[34] Oier Mees, Jessica Borja-Diaz, and Wolfram Burgard.
Grounding language with visual affordances over unstruc-
tured data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01911 , 2022.
[35] Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, and Wolfram Burgard. What
matters in language conditioned robotic imitation learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06252 , 2022.
[36] Suraj Nair, Eric Mitchell, Kevin Chen, Silvio Savarese,
Chelsea Finn, et al. Learning language-conditioned robot
behavior from ofﬂine data and crowd-sourced annotation.
InConference on Robot Learning , pages 1303–1315.
PMLR, 2022.
[37] Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea
Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A universal visual
representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.12601 , 2022.
[38] Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob
McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Powell, Jonas Schnei-
der, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, et al.
Multi-goal reinforcement learning: Challenging robotics
environments and request for research. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.09464 , 2018.
[39] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al.
Learning transferable visual models from natural language
supervision. In International Conference on Machine
Learning , pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
[40] Frank Röder, Manfred Eppe, and Stefan Wermter. Ground-
ing hindsight instructions in multi-goal reinforcement
learning for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.04308 ,
2022.
[41] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of bert:
smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.01108 , 2019.
[42] Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport:
What and where pathways for robotic manipulation. In
Conference on Robot Learning , pages 894–906. PMLR,
2022.
[43] Andrew Silva, Nina Moorman, William Silva, Zulﬁqar
Zaidi, Nakul Gopalan, and Matthew Gombolay. Lancon-
learn: Learning with language to enable generalization in
multi-task manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters , 7(2):1635–1642, 2021.
[44] Simon Stepputtis, Joseph Campbell, Mariano Phielipp,
Stefan Lee, Chitta Baral, and Heni Ben Amor. Language-
conditioned imitation learning for robot manipulation
tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 33:13139–13150, 2020.
[45] Stefanie Tellex, Thomas Kollar, Steven Dickerson,
Matthew R Walter, Ashis Gopal Banerjee, Seth Teller,
and Nicholas Roy. Approaching the symbol grounding
problem with probabilistic graphical models. AI magazine ,
32(4):64–76, 2011.
[46] Ted Xiao, Eric Jang, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Sergey Levine,
Julian Ibarz, Karol Hausman, and Alexander Herzog.
Thinking while moving: Deep reinforcement learning
with concurrent control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06089 ,
2020.
[47] Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan
Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian, Travis Armstrong,
Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Trans-
porter networks: Rearranging the visual world for robotic
manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages
726–747. PMLR, 2021.
APPENDIX
A. Additional Experiments
We present failure examples, study the importance of both
pre-training and ﬁne-tuning, and also explore whether VLMs
used for DIAL could also be utilized as a task representation.
1) Failure Examples: In addition to the successful example
trajectories visualized in Figure 5 and Figure 8, we also show
some examples of failure cases in Figure 9.
“mo v e t he ri gh t ap p l e t o t he l e ft o f t he c o un t er” 
F ailur e r e a s o n : p i ck e d t he wr o n g o b j e c t 
“u s e t he s po n g e t o cl e an t he ap p l e” 
F ailur e r e a s o n : wr o n g t ar g e t o b j e c t 
“mo v e t he c an t o t he bo tt o m o f t he t ab l e” 
F ailur e r e a s o n : mo v e d t he c an ri gh t, no t d o wn w ar d s 
“mo v e o r an g e ne ar t o t he chip ba g” 
F ailur e r e a s o n : flip pe d t he o r d er 
Fig. 9: Samples of evaluation failures for DIAL. Errors are
due to a combination of motor control and task confusion.
2) How important is VLM ﬁne-tuning for DIAL?: Whereas
Section V-C studies different prediction mechanisms for a
ﬁne-tuned CLIP model (FT-CLIP), we are also interested in
comparing different CLIP models altogether. The main FT-
CLIP model used in DIAL is initialized from the pretrained
OpenAI CLIP weights and then ﬁne-tuned on DAfrom
Section III-A , which begs the question: are both a strong
pretrained initialization and subsequent ﬁne-tuning necessary
for strong instruction labeling performance? To answer this
question, we perform instruction augmentation with (1) the
frozen pretrained OpenAI CLIP model and (2) a ﬁne-tuned
CLIP model that starts from a random weight initialization
instead of from the OpenAI pretrained weights.
As we see in Figure 10, predicted instruction accuracy
for both of these models is signiﬁcantly lower than the
main FT-CLIP model. The poor performance of the frozen
pretrained CLIP model (1) suggests that the particular embodied
captioning task required by DIAL is likely quite out of
distribution for the pre-training used by the OpenAI CLIP
model, so some amount of domain data is required. On the
other hand, the poor performance of training CLIP from scratch
on robot demonstration data (2) suggests that internet-scale
Fig. 10: Estimated top- Kcumulative instruction labeling
accuracy using CLIP variants. The ﬁne-tuned CLIP model
from OpenAI checkpoint [ 39] performed signiﬁcantly better
than frozen CLIP model and the ﬁne-tuned model from random
initial weights.
CLIPImgEncInitialFinal
T1T2T3I2I3I1I1T1I2T1I3T1I1T2I2T2I3T2I1T3I2T3I3T3“Pick up a coke can from the table”“Pick up a coke can from the table”“Pick up a coke can from the table”Crowd-sourced DescriptionCLIPImgEncFusion MLP
CLIPTextEnc
Fig. 11: CLIP architecture for ﬁne-tuning using the contrastive
loss. The image embeddings of the initial and ﬁnal observation
is concatenated and passed through an MLP to produce an
episode embedding to dot product with the text embedding.
pre-training is required to start from a reasonable prior; there
may not be sufﬁcient robot domain data in the datasets we
consider to fully train CLIP from scratch.
3) Is a VLM good at relabeling also a good task represen-
tation?: We study whether a VLM ﬁne-tuned for instruction
augmentation can also act as a better task representation
for conditioning a policy in the form of a more powerful
language embedding. Across the various groundtruth and
relabeled datasets we focus on, we ﬁnd that ﬁne-tuned CLIP
(FT-CLIP) is the most effective task representation, as seen in
Table V. FT-CLIP is a good representation not only for freeform
language instructions like those contained in the ﬁne-tuning
datasetDA, but also for structured metadata labels used to
collect the demonstrations in DB. Thus, we utilize FT-CLIP’s
language encoder as the main task representation for language
conditioning in all control policies we train, besides for policies
that explicitly denote otherwise, such as in Table V.
Evaluation on Novel Instructions
Dataset Task Encoder Spatial Rephrased Semantic Overall
DA USE 22:5% 50 :0% 0 :0% 21 :7%
DA FT-CLIP 30:0% 40 :0% 7 :7% 27 :5%
DA,DB CLIP 45:0% 40 :0% 10 :0% 40 :0%
DA,DB FT-CLIP 46:0% 60 :0% 15 :4% 42 :5%
DIAL, k= 1 USE 50:0% 50 :0% 20 :0% 43 :3%
DIAL, k= 1 FT-CLIP 62:0% 40 :0% 23 :1% 50 :0%
TABLE V: Comparing downstream policy performance when
improving the task representation from USE [ 10] to Pretrained
OpenAI CLIP (CLIP) [ 39] to ﬁne-tuned CLIP (FT-CLIP),
as described in Section III-A . We ﬁnd that the FT-CLIP
representation is the best task representation in all dataset
settings: training on crowd-sourced language annotations ( DA),
training on structured teleoperator commands along with crowd-
sourced language annotations { DA,DB}, and using DIAL
{DA,DB,DC} with Top-kwithk= 1 (DIAL,k= 1).
B. Dataset Details
Following the procedure in [ 7], we collect a large dataset
of robot trajectories via teleoperation by uniformly sampling
from one of the structured commands shown in Table VI and
sending those commands to teleoperators that operate a mobilee
manipulator robot in the real world. After teleoperators discard
unsafe or failed demonstrations, we save a dataset of 80,000
successful robot demonstration trajectories ( DB). Then, we
send 2,800 of the episodes from DBto be labeled by a pool of
human labelers, who see the ﬁrst and last frame of the episode
and are tasked with providing a natural language description of
how a robot could be commanded to from the ﬁrst frame to the
last frame. We request two independent language instruction
annotations for each episode, so we obtain a total of 5,600
episode-instruction pairs, which we save as DA. Finally, we
produce various relabeled datasets via instruction augmentation,
that we detail in Section IV-B for different prediction methods
for DIAL and Section V-B for different non-visual instruction
augmentation baselines.
C. DIAL Implementation Details
We implement DIAL with a CLIP model that is ﬁne-tuned
on 5,600 annotated episodes ( DA) with the procedure described
in Section III-A . The architecture of the CLIP model is shownin Figure 11. The initial and ﬁnal state observation images are
embedded using the CLIP image encoder Ienc, and the resulting
embeddings are concatenated and passed through a 200 hidden
dimension single-layer MLP to produce the ﬁnal episode
embedding. We use the CLIP text encoder Tencto embed
the crowd-sourced annotations to produce the corresponding
text embeddings. To ﬁne-tune, we loaded the CLIP encoder
weights from the ViT-B/32 OpenAI checkpoint. We use a
batch size of 64 and train for 100,000 iterations, but select
the best checkpoint based on text prediction accuracy on a
randomly held-out test set of 10% of the training dataset DA.
We ﬁne-tune both encoders IencandTencas well as the fusion
MLP.
After ﬁne-tuning CLIP, we source 18,719 candidate instruc-
tion labels ( L) fromDAand a corpus of GPT-3 proposals
of potential language instructions. The GPT-3 proposals are
generated by using the prompt shown in Listing 1 to iterate over
the 551 instructions used to collect teleoperated demonstrations.
We note that that Listing 1 generates diverse instructions
that may not be accurate for a given episode. Listing 1 is
purposefully tuned to produce “hallucinated” descriptions that
can add semantic properties in the proposed instructions that
may or not be correct (for example, “pick up the orange”
might be augmented into “retrieve the orange from the sink”
or “raise the orange next to the vase”). The motivation behind
this design decision is that GPT-3 predictions can be a lot less
conservative when being used downstream by DIAL, since
the CLIP model will ideally ﬁlter out irrelevant instructions.
In contrast, the prompt in Listing 2 is used for producing
Sentence-Level Synonyms, which should ideally always be
factually equivalent to the original instruction.
Next, to relabel 80,000 robot trajectories that do not
contain crowd-sourced annotations ( DB) withL, we follow
Section III-B to implement two variations of DIAL: Top-k
selection andMin-pselection . For these two variations, we
usek=f1;3;10gandp=f0:1;0:2;0:3g.
D. DIAL Hyperparameters
In Section V-C, we examined DIAL’s sensitivity to hyperpa-
rameters, including top-K and min-P sampling, which inﬂuence
dataset diversity and instruction accuracy (label noise). Such
tradeoffs are common in data augmentation, where the beneﬁts
of increased augmentation must be balanced with the risks
of too much label noise. These hyperparameter choices are
highly domain-speciﬁc, and in our case we optimize this
balance by selecting hyperparameters based on measuring
ofﬂine VLM prediction accuracy. Notably, hyperparameter
tuning in DIAL is substantially more cost-effective than manual
full dataset labeling by humans, enabling scalable policy
learning improvement from generated instructions. We plan
to include further discussion on hyperparameter selection and
future work on studying these tradeoffs in more detail.
E. Instruction Augmentation Baselines
a) Gaussian Noise: Given an instruction l, we add
Gaussian noise to the language embedding produced by the
Structured Teleoperator Command Cat-
egoriesCount Description Example Instruction
PickObject 17 picking objects on a counter pick water bottle
Move Object Near Object 342 moving an object near another move pepsi can near rxbar blueberry
Place Object Upright 8 placing an elongated object vertically
uprightplace coke can upright
Knock Object Over 8 picking an object and laying it sideways
on the counterknock redbull can over
Open / Close Drawer 6 opening or closing a counter drawer open the top drawer
Place Object intoReceptacle 85 pick an object on the table and put it in
a container or drawerplace brown chip bag into white bowl
PickObject fromReceptacle and
Place on the Counter85 pick an object out of a container or
drawer and place it on the counterpick green jalapeno chip bag from paper
bowl and place on counter
Total 551
TABLE VI: Teleoperators receive an instruction sampled from a total of 551 unique structured commands covering 7 different
manipulation skills. The 80,000 episodes in DBeach contain exactly one of these structured teleoperator commands.
F ir s t F r ame La s t F r ame 
Instruction Augmentation Prediction by CLIP p Accurate? 
#1: pick up the green can and place it in the bowl which is at the left side of the table 
#2: lift green can from table and place it in white cup 
#3: pick up the green can which is close to the water bottle and place it in the bowl 
#4: place green can into the plastic white bowl 
#5: pick the green can from the bottom right of the table and place it into the white bowl 
#6: pick up the silver can and place it in the white bowl 
#7: bring the blue can and place it into white paper bowl 
#8: pick up the green can from the bottom left side of the table 
#9: pick up the green can from the bottom side of the table and drop it into bowl 
#10: pick up the red bull can and drop it in the white bowl 0.2244 
0.1408 
0.1209 
0.0699 
0.0664 
0.0429 
0.0417 
0.0388 
0.0339 
0.0243 ✅
✅
❌
✅
✅
❌
❌
❌
✅
❌
Fig. 12: The top 10 proposed instruction augmentations for a single episode with original structured teleoperator command
place green can in white bowl . In some cases, the predicted captions provide additional semantic information such
as describing the location of the can or the material of the bowl. As seen in Figure 7, the probability CLIP assigns to each the
candidates quickly drops off past a few top predictions. Setting Min- p= 0:2would only take the ﬁrst instruction augmentation
prediction, while setting k= 3 would take the top three predictions, including an incorrect prediction (#3).
CLIP text encoder Tenc, directly obtaining the augmentation
in the latent space ~zl:
~zl=Tenc(l) +; N(0;)2Rd(3)
In our implementation, we choose = 0:05and perform the
Gaussian noise augmentation dynamically to the 512-dimension
CLIPTencembedding resulting from passing in the original
language instruction to the CLIP text encoder.
b) Word-level Synonyms: We replace individual words in
existing instructions with sampled synonyms from a predeﬁned
list. The mapping between words present in the originalstructured 551 instructions and possible synonyms is shown in
Listing 3.
c) Sentence-level Synonyms: We replace entire instruc-
tions with alternative instructions as proposed by GPT-3. We
pre-compute valid sentence-level synonyms by using the prompt
shown in Listing 1 to iterate over the 551 instructions used to
collect teleoperated demonstrations.
F . Augmented Dataset Details
As noted in Section IV-B , DIAL uses CLIP to score
predictions from 18,719 candidate text labels L, which are
a union of 9,393 crowd-sourced instructions ( LCC) from the
originalDAdataset as well as 9,336 instruction candidates
(LGPT 3) from GPT-3 curated with the prompt in Listing 1.
During the instruction augmentation process, we ﬁnd that CLIP
selects 3,675 unique instructions from these 18,719 candidates
L. Additionally, 86:3%of selected instructions were from LCC
and13:7%fromLGPT 3. These characteristics show that CLIP
generally prefers human-like instructions while sometimes
incorporating GPT-3 variations. We note that these prediction
characteristics may result from the fact that our relabeling
model CLIP was ﬁnetuned solely on crowd-sourced labels, and
that the desired output distribution is unclear (is it a positive
or negative property to prefer crowd-sourced annotations?).
Furthermore, it’s possible that the true distribution of accurate
and desireable language descriptions was already well-covered
by the human annotations; so if GPT-3 proposed an instruction
already contained in the human-sourced LCC, we would
deduplicate that candidate from Land consider the instruction
to be human-sourced. To enhance diversity, future work could
leverage improved VLMs and ﬁne-tune on more diverse labels,
including LLM-generated captions.
G. Language-Conditioned Policy Training
The policies used in this work are trained using the RT-1 [ 7]
architecture on a large dataset of human-provided demonstra-
tions. The policies receive natural language descriptions in
the form of a 512-dimensional VLM embedding and a short
history of images and outputs discrete action tokens which
are then transformed to continuous action outputs. Apart from
the experiments explicitly denoted as using USE [ 10] and
frozen CLIP [ 39] language embeddings in Table V, all policies
trained in this work utilize ﬁne-tuned CLIP (FT-CLIP) language
embeddings as described in Section III-A.
Note that the exact policy architecture is not the main focus
of this work, so we utilize the exact same policy training
procedure across each experiment and only vary the instruction
augmented datasets that the policies are trained on.
H. Evaluation Instructions
We utilize an evaluation setup focusing solely on novel
instructions unseen during training. To source these novel
instructions, we 1) crowd-source instructions from a different
set of humans than the original dataset labelers and 2) prompt
GPT-3 with Listing 2 to produce reasonable tasks that might
be asked of a home robot manipulating various objects on
a kitchen counter. Then, we normalize all instructions by
removing punctuation, removing non-alphanumeric symbols,
converting all instructions to lower case, and removing leading
and ending spaces. Afterwards, we ﬁlter out any instructions
already contained in either the instruction augmentation process
in Section III-B or in the original set of 551 foresight tasks in
Table VI. Finally, as seen in Table VII, we organize them into
various semantic categories to allow for more detailed analysis
of quantitative policy performance.Listing 1: GPT-3 Prompt for Proposing Candidate Tasks.
For the following tasks for a helpful home robot, rephrase
them to imagine different variations of the task. These
variations include different types of objects, different
locations, different obstacles, and different strategies
for how the task should be accomplished.
3 rephrases for: pick mountain dew
Answer: lift the mountain dew on the left side of the desk,
grab the mountain dew soda next to the water, pick the
farthest green soda can
4 rephrases for: move your arm to the right side of the desk
Answer: bring your arm to the right of the counter, move
right slightly, go far to the rightmost part of the table,
reorient your gripper to point right
10 rephrases for: bring me the yogurt
Answer: retrieve the yogurt, bring the white snack, pick up
the yogurt cup from the far right, lift the yogurt snack
from the left, bring back the yogurt near the chip bag, lift
the yogurt from the top of the counter, bring the yogurt
closest to the apple, grab the yogurt, lift the close left
yogurt on the bottom left, retrieve the yogurt on the
bottom of the table
10 rephrases for: <INSTRUCTION_TO_AUGMENT>
Answer:
Listing 2: GPT-3 Prompt for “Sentence-level Synonyms”.
You are a helpful home robot in an office kitchen. You are
able to manipulate household objects in a safe and efficient
manner. Here are some tasks you are able to accomplish in
various environments:
5 tasks in a sink with a sponge, brush, plate, and a cup:
move sponge near the cup, fill up the cup with water, clean
the plate with the brush, pick up the plate, put the cup
on the plate
3 tasks in a storage room with a box, a ladder, and a
hammer: lift the hammer, push the ladder, put the hammer
in the box
10 tasks on a table with an apple, a coke can, a sponge, and
an orange: pick up the apple, pick up the coke can, use the
sponge to clean the apple, use the sponge to clean the coke
can, put the apple down, put the coke can down, pick up the
orange, peel the orange, eat the orange, throw away the peel
10 tasks on a table with <OBJECT_1>, <OBJECT_2>, and
<OBJECT_3>:
Listing 3: Synonym Mapping for “Word-level Synonyms”.
SYNONYM_MAP = {
’rxbar blueberry’: [
’rxbar blueberry’, ’blueberry rxbar’,
’the blueberry rxbar’, ’the rxbar blueberry’
],
’rxbar chocolate’: [
’rxbar chocolate’, ’chocolate rxbar’,
’the chocolate rxbar’, ’the rxbar chocolate’
],
’pick’: [’pick’, ’pick up’, ’raise’, ’lift’],
’move’: [
’move’, ’push’, ’move’, ’displace’, ’guide’,
’manipulate’, ’bring’
],
’knock’: [’knock’, ’push over’, ’flick’, ’knockdown’],
’place’: [’place’, ’put’, ’gently place’, ’gently put’],
’open’: [’open’, ’widen’, ’pull’, ’widely open’],
’close’: [’close’, ’push close’, ’completely close’],
’coke’: [
’coke’, ’coca cola’, ’coke’, ’coca cola’,
’the coke’, ’a coke’, ’a coca cola’, ’the coca cola’
],
’green’: [
’green’, ’bright green’, ’grass colored’, ’lime’,
’a green’, ’the green’, ’a lime’, ’the lime’,
’the bright green’, ’a bright green’
],
’blue ’: [’blue ’, ’dark blue ’, ’the blue ’, ’a blue ’],
’pepsi’: [’pepsi’, ’blue pepsi’, ’pepsi’, ’a pepsi’,
’the pepsi’],
’7up’: [’7up’, ’white 7up’, ’7up’, ’7-up’, ’7up’,
’a 7up’, ’the 7up’],
’redbull’: [
’redbull’, ’red bull’, ’energy drink’,
’redbull energy’, ’redbull soda’,
’the redbull’, ’a redbull’, ’a red bull’,
’the red bull’
],
’blueberry’: [’blueberry’, ’blue berry’],
’chocolate’: [’chocolate’, ’brown chocolate’],
’brown’: [’brown’, ’coffee colored’,
’the brown’, ’a brown’],
’jalapeno’: [’jalapeno’, ’spicy’, ’hot’, ’fiery’],
’rice’: [’rice’],
’chip’: [’chip’, ’snack’, ’chips’],
’plastic’: [’plastic’],
’water’: [’water’, ’water’, ’agua’],
’bowl’: [’bowl’, ’half dome’, ’chalice’],
’togo’: [’togo’, ’to-go’, ’to go’],
’box’: [’box’, ’container’, ’paper box’],
’upright’: [’upright’, ’right side up’, ’correctly’],
’near’: [’near’, ’close to’, ’nearby’,
’very near’, ’very close to’],
’can’: [’can’, ’soda can’, ’aluminum can’],
’rxbar’: [’rxbar’, ’snack bar’, ’granola bar’,
’health bar’, ’granola’],
’apple’: [
’apple’, ’red apple’, ’the apple’, ’the red apple’,
’an apple’, ’a red apple’, ’small apple’,
’the small apple’
],
’orange’: [
’orange’, ’the orange’, ’orange fruit’, ’an orange’,
’a small orange’, ’a large orange’
],
’sponge’: [
’sponge’, ’yellow sponge’, ’the yellow sponge’,
’a yellow sponge’, ’a sponge’, ’the sponge’
],
’bottle’: [’bottle’, ’plastic bottle’,
’recycleable’, ’clear’],
}
Category Instruction Samples
Spatial [‘grab the bottle on the left of the table’, ‘grab the can which is on the
right side of the table’, ‘grab the chip on the left’, ‘grab the chip on
the right’, ‘grab the right most apple’, ‘knock down the right soda’, ‘lift
the apple which is on the left side of the table’, ‘lift the apple which is
on the right side of the table’, ‘lift the chips on the left side’, ‘lift
the chips on the right side’, ‘lift the left can’, ‘move the left soda to
the can on the right side of the table’, ‘move the soda can which is on the
right toward the chip bag’, ‘pick can which is on the left of the table’,
‘pick can which is on the right of the table’, ‘pick chip bag on the left’,
‘pick chip bag on the right’, ‘pick the can in the middle’, ‘pick the left
coke can’, ‘pick the left fruit’, ‘pick the leftmost chip bag’, ‘pick the
object on the right side of the table’, ‘pick the right coke can’, ‘pick
the right object’, ‘pick the rightmost chip bag’, ‘pick up the left apple’,
‘pick up the left object’, ‘pick up the right can’, ‘pick up the right
object’, ‘push the left side apple to the brown chips’, ‘raise bottle which
is to the left of the can’, ‘raise the blue tin’, ‘raise the left most can’,
‘raise the thing which is on the left of the counter’]
Rephrased [‘grab and lift up the green bag’, ‘grab the blue pepsi’, ‘grab the white
can’, ‘knock over the water’, ‘lift the orange soda’, ‘lift the yellow
rectangle’, ‘liftt the fruit’, ‘move green packet near the red apple’, ‘move
orange near to the chip bag’, ‘pick up the apple fruit’, ‘push green chips
close to the coke’, ‘upright the lime green can’, ‘put the apple next to the
candy bar’, ‘retrieve the can from the left side of the coffee table’, ‘set
the apple down next to the chocolate bar’, ‘take the can from the left side
of the counter’]
Semantic [‘move the can to the bottom of the table’, ‘move the green bag away from
the others’, ‘move the lonely object to the others’, ‘move the right apple
to the left of the counter’, ‘push blue chip bag to the left side of the
table’, ‘push the can towards the left’, ‘push the can towards the right’,
‘push the left apple to the right side’, ‘use the sponge to clean the coke
can’, ‘use the sponge to clean the apple’]
TABLE VII: Novel evaluation instructions sourced from humans or GPT-3, grouped by category. Spatial tasks focus on tasks
involving Spatial relationships, Rephrased tasks contain tasks that directly map to a foresight skill, and Semantic tasks describe
semantic concepts not contained in the relabeled or original datasets. In total, there are 60 instructions across the three categories.