Title: The Depth-to-Width Interplay in Self-Attention

The Depth-to-Width Interplay in Self-Attention
Yoav Levine, Noam Wies, Or Sharir, Hoﬁt Bata, and Amnon Shashua
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Abstract
Self-attention architectures, which are rapidly pushing the frontier in natural lan-
guage processing, demonstrate a surprising depth- inefﬁcient behavior: previous
works indicate that increasing the internal representation (network width) is just
as useful as increasing the number of self-attention layers (network depth). We
theoretically predict a width-dependent transition between depth-efﬁciency and
depth- inefﬁciency in self-attention. We conduct systematic empirical ablations on
networks of depths 6to48that clearly reveal the theoretically predicted behaviors,
and provide explicit quantitative suggestions regarding the optimal depth-to-width
allocation for a given self-attention network size. The race towards beyond 1-
Trillion parameter language models renders informed guidelines for increasing
self-attention depth and width in tandem an essential ingredient. Our guidelines
elucidate the depth-to-width trade-off in self-attention networks of sizes up to the
scale of GPT3 (which we project to be too deep for its size), and beyond, marking
an unprecedented width of 30K as optimal for a 1-Trillion parameter network.
1 Introduction
The golden age of deep learning has popularized the depth-efﬁciency notion: From an expressiveness
standpoint, increasing a neural network’s size by adding more layers (deepening) is advantageous
relatively to other parameter increase alternatives, such as increasing the dimension of the internal
representation (widening). Beyond overwhelming empirical signals for this notion [Simonyan and
Zisserman, 2014, He et al., 2016], depth-efﬁciency was theoretically supported from a variety of
angles [Cohen et al., 2016, Eldan and Shamir, 2016, Raghu et al., 2017, Daniely, 2017].
Diminishing returns in the case of very deep networks were mainly attributed to optimization issues,
and indeed the alleviation of these issues has allowed network depths to mount from 10s to100s
and beyond [He et al., 2016], enabling deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) to advance the
state-of-the-art in computer vision applications. However, as the ﬁeld matured, a more nuanced
perspective emerged. Empirical [Zagoruyko and Komodakis, 2016, Wu et al., 2019] and theoretical
[Lu et al., 2017] studies suggest that the interplay between depth and width may be more subtle.
Recently, a method for increasing width and depth in tandem (“EfﬁcientNet" by Tan and Le [2019])
has lead to the state-of-the-art on ImageNet while using a ConvNet with a fraction of the parameters
used by previous leaders. Our work provides principled guidelines for increasing width and depth in
tandem in self-attention networks.
Since the introduction of the Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017], along with its encoder-only variant,
BERT [Devlin et al., 2019], self-attention based deep learning architectures have taken over the
ﬁeld of natural language processing [Liu et al., 2019, Radford et al., 2019, Yang et al., 2019, Raffel
et al., 2019a, Clark et al., 2020]. However, in contrast to the depth “arms race" that took place in the
ConvNet case, the leading self-attention networks are not much deeper than the original BERT model.
In fact, even the strongest self-attention models trained to date, which increased the 0:3B parameter
count of BERT-large by factors of 100s to11B [Raffel et al., 2019a] and 175B [Brown et al., 2020],
have only increased its depth by factors of 2and4, respectively. The remaining size increase stems
from an increase in layer widths, clearly countering the depth-efﬁciency notion.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.arXiv:2006.12467v3  [cs.LG]  17 Jan 2021
Figure 1: (a)An ablation taken from ﬁgure 6 in Kaplan et al. [2020], examining the perplexity
scores of self-attention networks of varying depths and widths. Experiments on the L > 6curve
(yellow) all approximately obey the same improvement trend which depends only on the number
of network parameters and not on the depth-to-width ratio. For L6, depth-efﬁciency is clearly
demonstrated, but due to the L>6curve the authors conclude “depth inefﬁciency" of self attention.
(b)A representative of our experimental plots, which shows that a transition between depth-efﬁciency
and inefﬁciency takes place, and that both regimes affect the behavior also at L>6. Figure 2 shows
that this trend continues at least up to depth 48, and ﬁgure 3 shows that the transition between regimes
grows exponentially with depth, as predicted by our theory.
A recent empirical ablation study by Kaplan et al. [2020] provides support for the above signal.
Figure 1(a), taken from this study, leads the authors to conclude that the overall (non-embedding)
network size, given by 12Ld2
xwhereLis the number of self-attention layers (network depth)
anddxis the hidden representation dimension (network width), is the main predictor of performance
regardless of the depth-to-width ratio. This suggests that depth may not play as crucial a role in
self-attention networks as it does in convolutional networks.
In this paper, we address the above question of the depth-to-width interplay in self-attention networks,
and reveal fundamental subtleties in the above picture. We predict that self-attention will exhibit two
qualitatively different depth-efﬁciency and depth- inefﬁciency behaviors, in two distinct parameter
regimes, as depicted in ﬁgure 1(b). After presenting our theoretical analysis in sections 2-4, we
provide a thorough empirical evaluation in section 5, which validates our predicted trends for self-
attention networks of depths 6to48. Importantly, our theoretical and empirical results provide
quantitative guidelines for optimal depth-to-width parameter allocation given a ﬁxed parameter
budget (see for example table 1). The current challenge of reaching beyond 1-Trillion parameter
language models renders informed guidelines of how to increase self-attention depth and width in
tandem a mandatory ingredient. Our results clearly show that the optimal path towards the 1-Trillion
parameter mark includes massive widening.
1.1 An overview of our theoretical approach and ﬁndings
We analyze self-attention networks in which all non-linear activations and normalization operations
are removed. Otherwise, the analyzed class (presented in section 2) has the regular deep multi-headed
Key/Query/Value structure of common self-attention. After presenting this class in detail, we point
to recent studies which demonstrate that normalization and position-wise activations are much less
pertinent to the ability of self-attention to correlate inputs than its core connectivity, described in
full by our analyzed model. More generally, removing non-linearities for analysis of deep network
connectivity traits is a common simplifying assumption: results on expressiveness and optimization
of fully-connected [Saxe et al., 2013, Kawaguchi, 2016, Hardt and Ma, 2016], convolutional [Cohen
et al., 2016], and recurrent [Khrulkov et al., 2018, Levine et al., 2018a] networks have been attained
via this technique. Trade-offs between the depth and width of fully-connected neural networks have
been recently examined from theoretical [Fan et al., 2020, Bu et al., 2020] and empirical [Nguyen
et al., 2020] perspectives. To the best of our knowledge, our theoretical analysis is the ﬁrst to address
the question of parameter allocation between depth and width in self-attention networks.
We employ the tool of a function’s separation rank with respect to subsets of its inputs, which
quantiﬁes its ability to model input dependencies (presented in section 3). The separation rank
2
Borrowed from Brown et al. [2020] Trained in practice Optimal by our ﬁt
Model Name Size in params Depth (L) Width (dx)Depth (L) Width (dx)
GPT-3 Small 125M 12 768 23 555
GPT-3 Medium 350M 24 1024 32 886
GPT-3 Large 760M 24 1536 38 1220
GPT-3 XL 1.3B 24 2048 42 1550
GPT-3 2.7B 2.7B 32 2560 47 2110
GPT-3 6.7B 6.7B 32 4096 54 3150
GPT-3 13B 13.0B 40 5140 60 4200
GPT-3 175B or “GPT-3” 175.0B 96 12288 80 13500
Optimal 1-Trillion arch 1T – – 95 30100
Table 1: Our projections regarding optimal depth-to-width parameter distribution at self-attention
sizes corresponding to huge language models trained in Brown et al. [2020], according to the ﬁt in
section 5 (see ﬁgure 4 for the statistical uncertainty in these predictions). Up to the scale of 10B, the
trained GPT3 architectures were generally too shallow per their parameter count, meaning that they
under-performed relatively to the optimal architecture at that size (similarly to the depth 6network
in the white regime of ﬁgure 1(a). Coversely, the largest model trained to date, GPT3-175B, is too
deep given its size, and could have beneﬁted from widening at the expense of depth (similarly to the
depth 48network in the gray regime of ﬁgure 2(c). We project that the strongest 1-Trillion parameter
model would entail widening to an unprecedented width of 30K.
was employed for attaining theoretical insights on the dependencies modeled by convolutional and
recurrent networks [Cohen and Shashua, 2017, Levine et al., 2018a].
Rather than reinforcing the seemingly plausible hypothesis for the trend in ﬁgure 1(a), by
which widening a self-attention network is as effective as deepening it, we conﬁrm the contrary.
We show that the operation of stacking self-attention layers is so effective that it quickly saturates a
capacity of the network’s width. We establish in section 4 the existence of a depth threshold which
depends logarithmically on the width dx, denotedLth(dx)log(dx). Below the threshold, we prove
that depth-efﬁciency takes place in self-attention networks: a network of depth LLth(dx)cannot
be replicated by a shallower network, unless the latter’s width grows double-exponentially with
L. We prove the above by showing that the separation rank of functions realized by self-attention
networks grows double-exponentially with depth, but only polynomially with width, shedding light
on the effectiveness of the self-attention mechanism in modeling input interactions when recursively
repeated. However, we show that this overwhelming advantage of depth is quickly replaced by a
balanced growth. We prove that for self-attention networks with L>L th(dx)the ability to model
input dependencies, as modeled by the separation rank, increases similarly with depth and width. We
corroborate our theoretical ﬁndings empirically, as shown in the example of ﬁgure 1(b) and more
extensively in section 5.
1.2 An overview of our empirical approach and ﬁndings
For two networks with the same parameter count but of different depths L1<L 2and widthsd2<d1,
our theory indicates that: (1) there is no advantage to the deeper network when its dimension d2is
too small (width caps the beneﬁt of the added layers of depths L1+ 1;:::;L 2), but (2) the deeper
network should outperform the shallower one when its width d2is large enough such that the added
layers are in the depth-efﬁciency regime.
Traces of this predicted phenomenon appear in existing literature: A closer look at depths L6in
the experiment of Kaplan et al. [2020] in ﬁgure 1(a) reveals depth-efﬁciency, though the conclusion
of that study was of an overall depth inefﬁciency of self-attention, based on the behavior of their
L>6curve. In section 5 we demonstrate empirically that the more nuanced transition between depth-
efﬁciency and inefﬁciency, as predicted by our theory, affects commonly used self-attention depths
ofL= 6;12;18;24;30;36;48(a representative plot from our experiments is given in ﬁgure 1(b)).
The experiments reveal a third regime of “width-efﬁciency": a network can be too deep for a given
parameter budget, and under-perform relatively to a shallower and wider network of the same size
(see ﬁgure 2).
3
We ﬁt the network sizes at which a transition between the different depth-efﬁciency regimes occur
to an exponential form, predicted by our theory (see ﬁgure 3). This allows us to extrapolate the
depth-efﬁciency behavior of larger architectures, and project practical guidelines for the architectural
design of contemporary huge language models. Table 1 shows our suggested depths and widths
for models of sizes used in the recent GPT3 paper [Brown et al., 2020]. It seems that popular
self-attention architectures at all sizes trained up to GPT3’s crossing of the 100B parameter threshold,
could generally beneﬁt from deepening, with the appropriate widening (indicated by our guidelines).
With that, our results clearly indicate the importance of widening self-attention networks when
aiming for the 1 Trillion parameter mark . We project the optimal architecture at that size to have
depth 95 and width 30K, wider than any self-attention network trained to date.
2 The self-attention mechanism
Differentiable attention models in which the output attends over all LSTM-based input representations
have been introduced in the context of machine translation [Bahdanau et al., 2014]. Self-attention
(also referred to as intra-attention), which relates different inputs to each other, was ﬁrst employed
for machine reading [Cheng et al., 2016], and soon thereafter shown to be useful for a variety of
language applications when operating over LSTM-based representations [Parikh et al., 2016, Paulus
et al., 2017, Lin et al., 2017]. Vaswani et al. [2017] were the ﬁrst to demonstrate that a model based
solely on attention, the Transformer, can be better than LSTM based networks. The Transformer’s
encoder, BERT [Devlin et al., 2019], based entirely on self-attention, has demonstrated unprecedented
performance across natural language understanding tasks.
2.1 The Transformer encoder architecture
We begin by describing the self-attention operation of the original Transformer, and then in the
next subsection we present the modiﬁcations made in our analyzed model. Each layer l2[L] :=
f1;:::;Lgof a depth-LTransformer encoder is comprised of two sub-layers. The H-headed self-
attention sublayer of layer lcomputes the following function at position i2[N], over itsNinputs
fxl;j2RdxgN
j=1:
fl;i
SA 
xl;1;;:::;xl;N
=NX
j=1HX
h=1SMj
1=pda
WQ;l;hxl;i;WK;l;hxl;j	
WO;l;hWV;l;hxl;j(1)
whereSMjff(j)g:=ef(j)=P
j0ef(j0)is the softmax operation and 8h2[H]the learned weights
matricesWK;l;h;WQ;l;h;WV;l;h2Rdadxconvert the representation from its dimension dxinto the
attention dimension da=dx=H, creating Key, Query, and Value representations, respectively. The
learned weights matrix WO;l;h2Rdxdaconverts the attention result back into the representation
dimension. The multi-headed self-attention sublayer output in eq. (1), followed by a residual
connection and layer-norm [Ba et al., 2016], is inserted into a position-wise feed-forward + ReLU
sublayer, such that each layer’s output at position i2[N]is:
fl;i
Layer 
xl;1;:::;xl;N
=WFF,2ReLU
WFF,1LayerNorm
fl;i
SA+xl;i
; (2)
where the feed-forward matrices are usually taken to be WFF,12R4dxdx;WFF,22Rdx4dx, such
that the parameter count for an entire layer is 12d2
x. Finally, the depth- Lmulti-headed self-attention
operation of the Transformer encoder is obtained by a composition of Lsuch layers, i.e., when setting
8l2f2;:::;Lg;j2[N] :xl;j=LayerNorm
fl 1;j
Layer
, with x1;jdenoting the input to the deep
self-attention network at position j.1
2.2 The analyzed architecture
We analyze a deep multi-headed self-attention network variant which excludes the layer-norm
operation, the softmax normalization, and the ReLU activation (see a thorough discussion on the
effect of these relaxations in the next subsection). For cleanliness of presentation, we defer the
analysis of the residual connection to the appendix (it bears insigniﬁcant impact on our bounds).
Speciﬁcally, in the analyzed network, each layer l2[L]computes the following function at position
i2[N]over its inputsfxl;j2RdxgN
j=1:
1Focusing on the self-attention operation, we omit a description of the input embedding matrix, as well as of
the positional embeddings added at the input, which do not affect our analysis given realistic vocabulary sizes.
4
yl;i 
xl;1;:::;xl;N
=NX
j=1HX
h=1
WQ;l;hxl;i;WK;l;hxl;j
WO;l;hWV;l;hxl;j; (3)
where the Feed-Forward matrices can be now effectively embedded within WO;l;h. Our analysis
below treats a deep multi-headed self-attention network that is attained by a concatenation of Lsuch
layers. Importantly, the resultant “linearized" network form, where activations and normalizations are
removed, is by no means a linear mapping over the network input – every layer integrates 3copies of
its input in the above non-linear fashion.
By recursively applying eq. (3)Ltimes we attain the analyzed depth- Lself-attention network. We
denote the function realized by a network with embedding dimension dxandHattention heads per
layer at output location i2[N]by:
yi;L;dx;H; 
x1;:::;xN
:=NX
j1;:::;jC=1gL 
xi;xj1;:::;xjC
; (4)
where denotes all 4LHlearned weight matrices: 8(l;h)2[L]
[H] :WK;l;h;WQ;l;h;WV;l;h2
Rdadx;andWO;l;h2Rdxda, and the function gLis a placeholder, fully detailed in the appendix,
which integrates C=3L 1
2different input vectors. Network connectivity implies that the number of
summed position indices is also C. Comparing the form of eq. (4)to the operation of a single layer
in eq. (3), it can be seen schematically that while a single layer mixes the output position iwith every
input position jonce and aggregates the result, depth brings forth an exponential enhancement to the
amount of inputs mixed at once as well as to the amount of summed terms. In section 4, we quantify
this effect and analyze the limitations posed by the dimension of the internal representation (the
width) on the network’s ability to make use of this exponential growth with depth. In the following
subsection, we comment on the differences between the Transformer encoder architecture described
in eqs. (1) and (2) and the self-attention architecture presented in eqs. (3) and (4).
2.3 Relaxations
Empirical evidence indicates that while the ReLU activations and softmax normalization contribute to
performance (layer-norm mainly contributes to optimization), the basic mechanism in eqs. (3)and(4)
above captures the deﬁning self-attention characteristic of integrating the inputs with each other in a
ﬂexible manner:
The ReLU activation relaxation : Press et al. [2019] demonstrate that a “self-attention ﬁrst" BERT
variant that ﬁrst performs all of the self-attention operations (eq. (1)) consecutively, and only then
performs all of the position-wise feed-forward+ReLU operations, achieves comparable language
modeling performance relatively to the Baseline, which takes the regular approach of interleaving
these functionalities ( i.e., concatenating the BERT’s layer described in eq. (2)). They report that the
interleaved Baseline achieves a perplexity score of 18:630:26on the WikiText-103 test [Merity
et al., 2016] when averaged over 5random seeds, while the “self-attention ﬁrst" model achieves a
perplexity score of 18:82on this test set. The best pre-Transformer perplexity result on the WikiText-
103 test, reported by an LSTM-based architecture, was 29:2[Rae et al., 2018]. Since ReLU and
feed-forward do not mix different locations, this outcome directly implies that the self-attention
mechanism itself provides all of the elaborate input integration which differentiates BERT from
previous architectures.
The softmax normalization relaxation : Initially, an intuitive interpretation of attention as distributing
“fractions" of an overall attention budget among inputs was given to its actual operation of dynamically
linking input and output locations. The intuitive interpretation, tightly linked to the need to transform
the Key/Query similarity score into a distribution, has been recently challenged, as a growing body of
work shows that the attention weights distribution does not directly correlate with predictions [Jain
and Wallace, 2019, Pruthi et al., 2019, Brunner et al., 2020]. Moreover, Richter and Wattenhofer
[2020] recently point out undesirable traits of the softmax operation, demonstrating that its property
of conﬁning the outcome to the convex hull of its inputs unnecessarily limits the expressibility of
the self-attention mechanism. They experiment on a suite of synthetic tasks with a BERT variant in
which the softmax normalization is removed, and ﬁnd it to perform on par on almost all examined
tasks. When replacing the softmax with other normalizations they report improvements. Finally,
completely linearized attention (softmax removed) was employed on real tasks as means of reducing
5
costs, since the softmax operation cost scales with the input size [de Brébisson and Vincent, 2016,
Wang et al., 2020].
The goal of the above points is not to advocate modiﬁcations in BERT’s non-linearity or normalization
operations (we leave that to other works), but to note that while these are under examination and are
susceptible for alteration, the connectivity of self-attention, manifested by eqs. (3)and(4), is the
core mechanism driving its functionality. Our results, to be presented in section 4, demonstrate how
conclusions drawn by directly analyzing this mechanism accord with the operation of commonly
employed self-attention networks.
3 A measure of capacity for modeling input dependencies
In this section, we introduce the separation rank of the function realized by a self-attention network as
a measure that quantiﬁes its ability to model dependencies between subsets of its variable set fxjgN
j=1.
We will use this measure in order to establish the two depth-efﬁciency/ inefﬁciency regimes in self-
attention. The separation rank, introduced in Beylkin and Mohlenkamp [2002] for high-dimensional
numerical analysis, was employed for various applications, e.g., chemistry [Harrison et al., 2003],
particle engineering [Hackbusch, 2006], and machine learning [Beylkin et al., 2009]. Importantly, the
separation rank has been established as a measure of dependencies modeled by deep convolutional
and recurrent networks w.r.t. their inputs [Cohen and Shashua, 2017, Levine et al., 2018a,b].
Let(A;B)be a partition of the input locations, i.e.,AandBare disjoint subsets of [N]whose union
gives [N]. The separation rank of a function y(x1;:::;xN)w.r.t. partition (A;B), is the minimal
number of summands that together sum up to equal y, where each summand is multiplicatively
separable w.r.t. (A;B),i.e., is equal to a product of two functions – one that intakes only inputs from
one subsetfxj:j2Ag, and another that intakes only inputs from the other subset fxj:j2Bg.
Formally, the separation rank ofy: (Rdx)N!Rw.r.t. the partition (A;B)is deﬁned as follows:
sep(y;A;B) := minn
R2N[f0g:9g1:::gR: (Rdx)jAj!R;g0
1:::g0
R: (Rdx)jBj!Rs:t: (5)
y 
x1;:::;xN
=XR
r=1gr 
fxj:j2Ag
g0
r 
fxj:j2Bg
If the separation rank of a function w.r.t. a partition of its input is equal to 1, the function is
separable, meaning it cannot take into account consistency between the values of fxjgj2Aand those
offxjgj2B. In a statistical setting, if yis a probability density function, this would mean that
fxjgj2Aandfxjgj2Bare statistically independent. The higher sep(y;A;B)is, the farther yis from
this situation, i.e.the more it models dependency between fxjgj2Aandfxjgj2B, or equivalently,
the stronger the correlation it induces between the inputs indexed by Aand those indexed by B.
The ﬁxed connectivity of ConvNets has been shown to yield high separation ranks w.r.t. partitions
which separate neighboring inputs ( e.g., where all odd positions are in Aand all even positions are
inB), while suffering from low separation ranks w.r.t. partitions which separate distant inputs ( e.g.,
whereA= 1;:::;N=2andB=N=2+ 1;:::;N ). Our analysis establishes a qualitatively different trait
for self-attention networks, which treat all balanced partitions alike:
Proposition 1. Forp2[dx], letyi;L;dx;H;
p be the scalar function computing the pth entry of an
output vector at position i2[N]of the depth- Lself-attention network with embedding dimension dx
andHattention heads per layer, deﬁned in eqs. (3)and(4). Then, its separation rank w.r.t. balanced
partitions, which obey A[B= [N];jAj;jBj=N=2, is invariant to the identity of the partition, i.e.,
8A[B= [N];~A[~B= [N]; s:t:jAj;jBj;j~Aj;j~Bj=N=2:
sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ;A;B) =sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ;~A;~B) (6)
Accordingly, we will omit the speciﬁcation of the partition in future uses, denoting sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p )
as the separation rank of yi;L;dx;H;
p w.r.t. any balanced partition of the inputs.
This result accords with the intuition regarding the ﬂexibility of the attention mechanism – it does
not integrate the input in a predeﬁned pattern like convolutional networks, but dynamically learns
to correlate any inter-dependent subsets of the inputs. Natural text exhibits non-smooth non-local
dependency structures, as correlations between input segments can abruptly rise and decay with
distance. The fact that self-attention facilitates all correlation patterns equally poses it as a more
natural architecture for language modeling related tasks. Convolutional networks, with their local
6
connectivity, may have the right inductive bias for imagery data, but partitions unfavored by them
may reﬂect more erratic correlations that are nonetheless relevant for natural language inputs.
However, the above property of indifference to the input partition is not enough for succeeding at
tasks with elaborate input dependencies, since a function with equally low separation ranks for all
input partitions has limited ability to model such dependencies. In the following section, we analyze
how different architectural parameters affect the ability of self-attention networks to correlate their
inputs, and by bounding their separation ranks, we establish the different depth-efﬁciency regimes in
self-attention networks.
4 The effect of depth in self-attention networks
In this section, we present tight bounds on the separation rank of self-attention networks, which reveal
two qualitatively different regimes. In the ﬁrst regime of L<log3(dx), analyzed in subsection 4.1,
we establish that deepening is clearly preferable to widening. In the second regime of L>log3(dx),
analyzed in subsection 4.2, we show that deepening and widening play a similar role in enhancing
the expressiveness self-attention networks.
4.1 Depth-efﬁciency in self-attention
The recursive structure of deep self-attention hints at an exponential increase of input mixing with
depth: The output of each layer is introduced 3times into the Key/Query/Value computation made
by the subsequent layer. In this subsection, we formalize this intuition for self-attention networks
of sufﬁcient width, dx>3L. Theorem 1 below bounds the separation rank of such networks.
Subsequent to its statement and brief outline of its proof, we explicitly show in corollary 1 the implied
double-exponential requirement from a bounded depth network attempting to replicate a deeper one.
Theorem 1. Forp2[dx], letyi;L;dx;H;
p be the scalar function computing the pth entry of an output
vector at position i2[N]of the depth- Lself-attention network with embedding dimension dxand
Hattention heads per layer, deﬁned in eqs. (3)and(4). Letsep(yi;L;dx;H;
p )be its separation rank
(section 3). If L;dxobeyL<log3(dx), then the following holds almost everywhere in the network’s
learned parameter space, i.e.for all values of the weight matrices (represented by ) but a set of
Lebesgue measure zero:
3L 2(log3(dx H) +a)log3 
sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p )
3L 1
2log3(dx+H) (7)
witha= L+ [2 log32]. (note that log3(dx H) +a>0in this regime of L<log3(dx)).
We provide below a short proof sketch of the lower bound in the above theorem. The derivation of
the upper bound is more straightforward, and is left for the appendix, along with a formal proof of
the lower bound.
Proof sketch for the lower bound in theorem 1 : We make use of grid tensor based function discretiza-
tion [Hackbusch, 2012] – The function realized by a self-attention network is evaluated for a set
of points on an exponentially large grid in the input space, and the outcomes are stored in a matrix
M 
yi;L;dx;H;
p
, which we prove upholds: rank
M 
yi;L;dx;H;
p
sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ),i.e., its
rank lower bounds the separation rank. Since the entries of M 
yi;L;dx;H;
p
vary polynomially
with the self-attention network’s weights, we show that it sufﬁces to ﬁnd a single network weights
assignment for which the rank of the matrix is greater than the desired lower bound, in order
to prove the case for almost all of the conﬁgurations of the network’s learned weights (but a set
of measure zero). Thus, we prove the lower bound in theorem 1 by choosing a simple weight
assignment that still represents the self-attention connectivity, and showing that for this value of ,
rank
M 
yi;L;dx;H;
p
achieves the lower bound, in turn lower bounding the separation rank.
Theorem 1 bounds the separation rank of a deep self-attention network of sufﬁcient width between two
functions that grow double-exponentially with depth and polynomially with width, tightly describing
its behavior w.r.t. depth and width. Because equivalence cannot hold between two functions of
different separation ranks, the above result implies a double-exponential requirement from the width
of a shallow network attempting to replicate the deep one, and clear depth efﬁciency holds:
Corollary 1. With probability 1, the function realized upon randomization of the weights of a deep
self-attention network deﬁned in eqs. (3)and(4)with depthLdeepand widthddeep
x>3Ldeep, may only
7
be realized by a shallower network with depth Lshallow=Ldeep=dand widthdshallow
x =wdshallow
x , where
d>1;w> 1(i.e., the deep network is deeper by a factor of dand the shallow network is wider by a
factor ofw), if the following holds:
w/exp(exp(d)):
4.2 Depth in-efﬁciency in self-attention
Beyond establishing depth-efﬁciency in early self-attention layers, the above analysis sheds light
on the contribution of a self-attention network’s depth to its ability to correlate input subsets. The
separation rank (w.r.t. any partition) of a single layer, given by eq. (3), is only linear in Handdx,
showcasing a limitation of the class of functions realized by single self-attention layers to model
elaborate input dependencies. Theorem 1 quantiﬁes the double exponential growth of this capacity
measure with the number of stacked self-attention layers. The following theorem shows that this
growth is capped by the dimension of the internal representation:
Theorem 2. Foryi;L;dx;H;
p as deﬁned in theorem 1, if L > log3(dx), then the following holds
almost everywhere in the network’s learned parameter space, i.e.for all values of the weight matrices
(represented by ) but a set of Lebesgue measure zero:
1
2dxL+b1+b2log3 
sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p )
2dxL+c1+c2 (8)
with corrections on the order of L:b1= L H
2+ 1
,c1=L, and on the order of dxlog3(dx):
b2= dx 
1 +1
2log3 dx H
2
,c2= 2dxlog3dx=2p
2e+ log3dx.
We provide below a proof sketch of the upper bound in the above theorem. The formal proof, along
with the proof of the lower bound, which is similar to the one illustrated above for the lower bound in
theorem 1, are left for the appendix.
Proof sketch for the upper bound in theorem 2 : By observing that yi;L;dx;H;
p is a polynomial of
degree 2C= 3L 1(Cis introduced in eq. (4)), we ﬁnd a kernel   
x1;:::;xN
that maps the
input into a space where each of the output monomials is a linear functional. We ﬁnd a basis for
the subspace Vspanned by the output monomials, and bound the separation rank of each element
in that basis by a constant. The dimension of Vis exponential in Ndxand polynomial in 3L 1,
providing equal groundings for depth and width. A careful analysis that exploits the sums over the
indicesj1;:::;jCin eq. (4), removes the dependence on N.
Theorem 2 states that when the network’s depth passes a width dependent threshold, the separation
rank turns from increasing polynomially with width and double-exponentially with depth to increasing-
exponentially with width and depth together. Thus, while an increase in network size increases its
capacity to model input dependencies, our result shows that there is no longer a clear cut advantage
of depth in this respect:
Corollary 2. Letydeepdenote the function realized by a deep self-attention network at any output
locationi2[N], deﬁned in eqs. (3)and(4)with depth and width denoted Ldeep;ddeep
xsuch that
Ldeep>log3ddeep
x. Denote1:=log3ddeep
x
Ldeep<1. Then, there exists 2=O(log(H)log(ddeep
x)
log(Ldeep))such that the function realized by a network of depth: Lshallow=1Ldeep+2, and
width:dshallow
x = 32ddeep
x, denoted yshallow, has higher separation rank, i.e.:
sep(yshallow
p )>sep (ydeep
p0) ; wherep;p02[dx] (9)
The above corollary, which follows from theorems 1 and 2, shows that the separation rank of a
function realized by a self-attention network of arbitrary depth L>log3(dx)can be surpassed by a
shallower network of polynomial width, contrarily to the established behavior for networks of depth
L<log3(dx).
We leave it as an open conjecture that a polynomially sized shallower network can exactly replicate
the operation of a deeper network in this regime. With that, we point out that a variety of results which
directly bound different complexity measures of deep networks have been put forward, shedding light
on their operation [Montufar et al., 2014, Bianchini and Scarselli, 2014, Raghu et al., 2017, Serra
et al., 2017, Inoue, 2019]. Bounds on the separation rank have been used to explain the operation of
more veteran architectures, and we ﬁnd them to be particularly relevant in the case of self-attention:
this complexity measure quantiﬁes the amount of input inter-dependency induced by the network,
directly reﬂecting a widespread intuition on the success behind the self-attention mechanism.
8
Figure 2: An experimental validation of the existence of the two depth-efﬁciency/ inefﬁciency regimes
for common self-attention networks. The transition between regimes occurs in exponentially larger
network sizes as the networks gets deeper, in agreement with our theory (see ﬁgure 3).
5 Depth-efﬁciency regimes in common self-attention networks
In the previous sections, we analyzed a simpliﬁed version of self-attention networks (described in
section 2). For this class, we proved the existence of the two different depth-efﬁciency/ inefﬁciency
regimes in self-attention networks, and further quantiﬁed the transition point between regimes to be
exponential in network width (and accordingly in network size). In this section, we demonstrate that
our theoretical predictions are manifested in common self-attention networks: the experiments below
were conducted over common self-attention architectures which include all operations that were
omitted in our theoretical analysis. We describe the training setup in section 5.1, the experiments in
section 5.2, and the projection regrading optimal depth to width ratios (see table 1) in section 5.3.
5.1 The training setup
We trained common self-attention architectures of depths L= 6;12;18;24;30;36;48and varying
widths, such that the network sizes range between 106and6108(full details on the widths of the
trained architectures are given in the appendix). We trained decoder-only (unidirectional) models,
by optimizing the autoregressive log-likelihood of the training examples. We used a smaller than
usual vocabulary size of 2000 so that the vocabulary embedding parameters, given by dxVfor a
vocabulary of size V, would constitute a small fraction of the learned parameters for all data points.
Autoregressive models were shown to work well even on character level vocabularies ( e.g., [Peters
et al., 2018]); due to modeling a joint distribution over the text, they are less sensitive to vocabulary
size than bidirectional models [Levine et al., 2021].
Our training set was English Wikipedia, BookCorpus and OpenWebText. We report the loss on a
held out test set of size 170K sequences. Notably, we estimated the variance of the pretraining and
evaluation procedure by rerunning 11of the trained architectures three times each, and found it to be
very low – the reported test loss is stable up to its third digit. The remainder of the training details are
given in the appendix.
5.2 Experiments
5.2.1 Distinct depth-efﬁciency regimes in self-attention
Figure 2 shows that the predicted devision into two depth-efﬁciency/ inefﬁciency regimes indeed
takes place in common self-attention architectures. When comparing depths (Lshallow;Ldeep) =
f(6;12);(12;24);(24;48)g, a qualitatively different depth-efﬁciency behavior is observed as the
network size varies. For smaller network sizes, deepening is not favorable over widening. Our
theoretical analysis predicts this, showing that when the width of the deeper network is not large
enough it can not use its excess layers efﬁciently. However, when the network’s size is increased by
widening, a transition into the depth-efﬁciency regime is clearly demonstrated: for the same parameter
budget the deeper network performs better. Once the deeper network becomes wide enough, such
that the depth threshold for depth-efﬁciency surpasses Lshallow, it is signiﬁcantly more expressive.
5.2.2 Transition between regimes depends exponentially on depth
Importantly, beyond a qualitative match to the two predicted depth-efﬁciency/ inefﬁciency behaviors,
the experiments corroborate our prediction for an exponential dependence of the “depth-efﬁciency
width" — the width for which a network becomes depth-efﬁcient — on the network’s depth. By
9
Figure 3: (a)A ﬁt of the predicted exponential dependence of network width on its depth at the
transition point between the depth-efﬁciency/inefﬁciency regimes. The experimental points are
marked by black crosses and their empirical errors by red vertical lines. (b)The network size at
the transition between regimes NTransition as a function of network depth. The green area marks an
interval of 2NTransition as calculated in eq. 10 with the ﬁt parameters and their variance given in
eq. 11. Architectures to the top-left of the curve are too shallow relative to their size, and can be
improved by deepening. (c)The color in each range of network sizes corresponds to the color of the
depth reaching the minimal loss in this range. This implies that architectures to the bottom-right of
the curve in ﬁgure (b) are too deep relative to their size, and can be improved by widening.
quantifying this exponential behavior (ﬁgure 4), we attain practical guidelines for depth-to-width
parameter allocation in a self-attention network of a given size.
Per network depth, we examine the width in which it diverges from the subse-
quent trained depth, i.e., we examine the following pairs of trained adjacent depths:
(6;12);(12;18);(18;24);(24;30);(30;36);(36;48). For each pair, we estimate the shallower net-
work’s transition width (marking the crossing between gray and white areas in ﬁgure 2) as the
average of its width in two points: the ﬁrst point in which the shallower network under-performs in a
statistically signiﬁcant manner (see standard deviation estimation in the appendix), and the point to
its left in which the performance of the two is not distinguishable. We take the empirical error of this
estimation to be the distance between the two points.
Our theoretical results in section 4 predict that the above empirically estimated transition should
occur when the shallower network’s width dxis exponential in its depth L. Accordingly, we ﬁt
a linear dependence of the log of the width on the depth and receive the ﬁt coefﬁcients (a;b):
log (dx) =a+bL. The linear ﬁt, shown in Figure 3(a) yields measures of R2= 0:998and
2
red= 0:854(see further details in the appendix). These measures imply a good compatibility of the
theoretically predicted dependence to the measurements, and further reinforce the practical use we
make of the ﬁt parameters aandbhereinafter, for predicting the network size for which the regime
transition occurs per depth.
Speciﬁcally, we insert dx=eaebLinto the dependence N= 12Ld2
xand calculate the transition
size and its propagated uncertainty as:
NTransition (L) = 12Le2ae2bL(10)
NTransition (L) =q
(dN=da)22a+ (dN=db)22
b+ 2 (dN=da) (dN=db)ab
with the ﬁt parameters given by:
(a b) = 
5:0390:030 5:5510 21:310 3
(11)
2
aab
ab2
b
=
9:410 4 3:7410 5
 3:7410 51:710 6
Figure 3(b) shows the empirical transition sizes per depth on top of the projection and its error,
calculated by eq. 10 with the ﬁt parameters in eq. 11. Networks to the left of the curve are too shallow
given their parameter budget, and can be improved by deepening at the expense of their width.
5.2.3 “Width-efﬁciency" in small network sizes
Our experiments reveal an empirical phenomenon that was not predicted by our theory. We established
in section 4 that depth does not have an advantage when the width is too small, but our bounds
10
do not separate wider networks from deeper ones in this depth-inefﬁciency regime. A surprising
phenomenon is seen in ﬁgures 2(b,c): for small enough network sizes, deeper self-attention networks
perform worse than shallow ones. We leave a theoretical treatment of this regime for future work.
The above “width-efﬁciency" empirical phenomenon leads to an important observation: for a given
network size, a certain network can be too shallow, as we predicted theoretically and corroborated
empirically above, but it can also be too deep . In other words, the region to the right of the ﬁt curve
in ﬁgure 3(b) includes networks that can be improved by widening at the expense of their depth.
This implies that rather than representing a minimal depth per given self-attention network size,
the curve in ﬁgure 3(b) represents the area of an optimal depth per network size. We provide a
demonstration of this idea in ﬁgure 3(c), which clearly shows that when comparing networks of
depthsL= 6;12;24;48, each one would be best to use in a different range of network sizes (the
color in each range corresponds to the best performing depth in that range).
5.3 Projecting to larger networks
Beyond reﬂecting our theoretical predictions, the ﬁt in ﬁgure 3 can be used to project beyond the
scope of our experiments in order to shed light on architecture design decisions made for much larger
self-attention networks, like the contemporary huge Transformer-based language models [Brown
et al., 2020, Raffel et al., 2019b, Rosset, 2020]. Figure 4 shows the extrapolation of the ﬁtted function
and the uncertainty up to networks of depth 100. Notably, despite the uncertainty growing as the scope
extends,NTransition (L=100)
NTransition (L=100)= 0:2,i.e., the predictions for the optimal network size in the L= 100
case are likely to be accurate within 20% of the predicted size, yielding meaningful and unforeseen
practical implications.
Figure 4: An extrapolation of the optimal size per depth
(eq. 10) beyond the scope of our experiments. The purple
circles mark the GPT3 experiments detailed in table 1.For example, when examining the ar-
chitecture of GPT3, the deepest self-
attention network trained to date with
96layers, we get NTransition (96) =
1:170:231012, or over a Trillion
parameters. This places GPT3 with
its 175B parameters signiﬁcantly be-
low our ﬁt, suggesting that it may be
too deep given its parameter budget.
In fact, the optimal depth for GPT3’s
size is predicted to be L= 80 , since
NTransition (80) = 1:650:251011.
Table 1 includes further suggestion for
huge models following our ﬁt, includ-
ing a suggestion to deepen networks
on the left of the curve in ﬁgure 4.
With high certainty given our exper-
imental data, the optimal model size
increase towards 1 Trillion parameter
models and beyond is via widening.
6 Discussion
An apparent “depth- inefﬁciency" of self-attention networks was pointed out by prior works – in
contrast to other successful deep learning architectures, in the case of self-attention there does not
seem to be a clear advantage to deepening vs. widening. Our theoretical analysis clearly reﬂects
this behavior in one parameter setting, but suggests an important nuance regarding its origins, while
predicting a separate “depth-efﬁciency" regime in another parameter setting. Rather than an obvious
explanation for the observed depth inefﬁciency, by which the self-attention mechanism does not
beneﬁt much from the operation of compounding, our analysis strongly points at the converse: self-
attention is so effective at integrating its inputs, that it very quickly reaches saturation in the amount
of dependencies that can be supported by the representation dimension.
Thus, for early self-attention compounding, we prove a rapid growth in expressiveness with depth,
and speciﬁcally in the ability to ﬂexibly correlate between any input locations, which can not be
accounted for by any reasonable widening. However, our analysis pinpoints a transition in which the
11
capacity of width to support the above rapid growth exhausts. Thus, when the width of a self-attention
network is not large enough, the above depth-efﬁciency disappears – deepening and widening become
equivalent in terms of expressiveness.
We did not ﬁnd a result which directly upper bounds depth-efﬁciency in other architecture classes.
Works by Sharir and Shashua [2018], Levine et al. [2019] show an exponential growth with depth
of a measure related to the separation rank in certain classes of convolutional networks. Comparing
this with the double-exponential growth shown in theorem 1 for early self-attention layers, it may
be conjectured that convolutional networks seemingly beneﬁt more from depth than self-attention
does because their separation rank grows less rapidly, so they do not saturate some width dependent
threshold as quickly as self-attention does. We leave these investigations for future work.
The experiments presented in section 5 reveal a qualitative and quantitative match to our theoretical
predictions. Beyond reinforcing the validity of our theoretical interpretation, our comprehensive
experimental setup allowed us to extrapolate and project depth-to-width trade-offs in huge self-
attention networks, that are currently being trained as powerful language models. For example, GPT3,
the deepest self-attention network trained to date with 96layers, has matched this depth with an
unprecedented width of 12K. However, our projections clearly show that for this number of layers the
network should be much wider. In fact, the logarithmic dependence that we establish between
the optimal depth and width clearly dictates that size increase should be mainly via widening
from this point (100B models) onwards. This is good news from an engineering perspective:
width can be increased more efﬁciently than depth in terms of parallelization. The multi-million
dollar price tag on these architectures, along with the race to push the envelope towards 1-Trillion
parameter models and beyond, make such informed guidelines an essential ingredient.
Beyond elucidating the behavior of vanilla self-attention architectures, our work theoretically moti-
vates architectural changes that can provide the next leap in self-attention network expressiveness. By
indicating the network width as the limiting factor for depth-efﬁciency, our analysis encourages the de-
velopment of methods for increasing network width with low expenses. For example, we point at the
concept of ShufﬂeNet [Ma et al., 2018], which has proven to be efﬁcient for convolutional networks.
They increase the representation dimension while using only a fraction of it for computation in each
layer. This way, the computational costs are contained, but the width related theoretical limitations,
posed by our work, are relaxed. Recently, Fedus et al. [2021] trained a 1-Trillion parameter model
via a related approach which learns to choose the subset of parameters to apply in each layer. Indeed,
we view our work as part of an effort to provide timely interpretations as feedback for the tremendous
empirical pull in our ﬁeld.
Acknowledgments
We thank Daniel Jannai for assistance in the experiments, and Jared Kaplan for the permission to
use the ﬁgure in Kaplan et al. [2020]. This research was supported by the ERC (European Research
Council) and the ISF (Israel Science Foundation). Experiments were performed with Cloud TPUs
and supported by Google’s TensorFlow Research Cloud (TFRC). Yoav Levine was supported by the
Israel Academy of Sciences Adams fellowship.
Arash Amini, Amin Karbasi, and Farokh Marvasti. Low-rank matrix approximation using point-wise operators.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 58(1):302–310, 2012.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 ,
2016.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 , 2014.
Gregory Beylkin and Martin J Mohlenkamp. Numerical operator calculus in higher dimensions. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences , 99(16):10246–10251, 2002.
Gregory Beylkin, Jochen Garcke, and Martin J Mohlenkamp. Multivariate regression and machine learning with
sums of separable functions. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing , 31(3):1840–1857, 2009.
Monica Bianchini and Franco Scarselli. On the complexity of neural network classiﬁers: A comparison between
shallow and deep architectures. Neural Networks and Learning Systems, IEEE Transactions on , 25(8):
1553–1565, 2014.
12
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 , 2020.
Gino Brunner, Yang Liu, Damian Pascual Ortiz, Oliver Richter, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Roger Wattenhofer.
On identiﬁability in transformers. 2020.
Kaifeng Bu, Yaobo Zhang, and Qingxian Luo. Depth-width trade-offs for neural networks via topological
entropy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07587 , 2020.
Richard Caron and Tim Traynor. The zero set of a polynomial. WSMR Report 05-02 , 2005.
Jianpeng Cheng, Li Dong, and Mirella Lapata. Long short-term memory-networks for machine reading. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1601.06733 , 2016.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V . Le, and Christopher D. Manning. Electra: Pre-training text encoders
as discriminators rather than generators. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1xMH1BtvB .
Nadav Cohen and Amnon Shashua. Inductive bias of deep convolutional networks through pooling geometry. In
5th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017.
Nadav Cohen, Or Sharir, and Amnon Shashua. On the expressive power of deep learning: A tensor analysis.
Conference On Learning Theory (COLT) , 2016.
Amit Daniely. Depth separation for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08489 , 2017.
Alexandre de Brébisson and Pascal Vincent. A cheap linear attention mechanism with fast lookups and ﬁxed-size
representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05866 , 2016.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio, editors,
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi:
10.18653/v1/n19-1423. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423 .
Ronen Eldan and Ohad Shamir. The power of depth for feedforward neural networks. In Conference on learning
theory , pages 907–940, 2016.
Fenglei Fan, Rongjie Lai, and Ge Wang. Quasi-equivalence of width and depth of neural networks. 2020.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with
simple and efﬁcient sparsity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03961 , 2021.
Wolfgang Hackbusch. On the efﬁcient evaluation of coalescence integrals in population balance models.
Computing , 78(2):145–159, 2006.
Wolfgang Hackbusch. Tensor spaces and numerical tensor calculus , volume 42. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2012.
Moritz Hardt and Tengyu Ma. Identity matters in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04231 , 2016.
Godfrey Harold Hardy, John Edensor Littlewood, and George Pólya. Inequalities . Cambridge university press,
1952.
Robert J Harrison, George I Fann, Takeshi Yanai, and Gregory Beylkin. Multiresolution quantum chemistry in
multiwavelet bases. In Computational Science-ICCS 2003 , pages 103–110. Springer, 2003.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 770–778, 2016.
K. Inoue. Expressive numbers of two or more hidden layer relu neural networks. In 2019 Seventh International
Symposium on Computing and Networking Workshops (CANDARW) , pages 129–135, 2019.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. Attention is not explanation. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar
Solorio, editors, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June
2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 3543–3556. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1357. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1357 .
13
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020.
Kenji Kawaguchi. Deep learning without poor local minima. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 586–594, 2016.
Valentin Khrulkov, Alexander Novikov, and Ivan Oseledets. Expressive power of recurrent neural networks. In
6th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2018.
Yoav Levine, Or Sharir, Alon Ziv, and Amnon Shashua. Beneﬁts of depth for long-term memory of recurrent
networks. (ICLR 2018) International Conference on Learning Representations workshop , 2018a.
Yoav Levine, David Yakira, Nadav Cohen, and Amnon Shashua. Deep learning and quantum entanglement:
Fundamental connections with implications to network design. In 6th International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) , 2018b.
Yoav Levine, Or Sharir, Nadav Cohen, and Amnon Shashua. Quantum entanglement in deep learning ar-
chitectures. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 122:065301, Feb 2019. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.065301. URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.065301 .
Yoav Levine, Barak Lenz, Opher Lieber, Omri Abend, Kevin Leyton-Brown, Moshe Tennenholtz, and Yoav
Shoham. Pmi-masking: Principled masking of correlated spans. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3Aoft6NWFej .
Zhouhan Lin, Minwei Feng, Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Mo Yu, Bing Xiang, Bowen Zhou, and Yoshua Bengio.
A structured self-attentive sentence embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03130 , 2017.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. CoRR ,
abs/1907.11692, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692 .
Zhou Lu, Hongming Pu, Feicheng Wang, Zhiqiang Hu, and Liwei Wang. The expressive power of neural
networks: A view from the width. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 6231–6239,
2017.
Ningning Ma, Xiangyu Zhang, Hai-Tao Zheng, and Jian Sun. Shufﬂenet v2: Practical guidelines for efﬁcient cnn
architecture design. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 116–131,
2018.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1609.07843 , 2016.
Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. Are sixteen heads really better than one? In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 14014–14024, 2019.
Guido F Montufar, Razvan Pascanu, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. On the number of linear regions of
deep neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 2924–2932, 2014.
Thao Nguyen, Maithra Raghu, and Simon Kornblith. Do wide and deep networks learn the same things?
uncovering how neural network representations vary with width and depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15327 ,
2020.
Ankur P Parikh, Oscar Täckström, Dipanjan Das, and Jakob Uszkoreit. A decomposable attention model for
natural language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01933 , 2016.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A deep reinforced model for abstractive summarization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304 , 2017.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365 , 2018.
Oﬁr Press, Noah A Smith, and Omer Levy. Improving transformer models by reordering their sublayers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1911.03864 , 2019.
Danish Pruthi, Mansi Gupta, Bhuwan Dhingra, Graham Neubig, and Zachary C Lipton. Learning to deceive
with attention-based explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.07913 , 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language models are
unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
14
Jack W Rae, Chris Dyer, Peter Dayan, and Timothy P Lillicrap. Fast parametric learning with activation
memorization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10049 , 2018.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei
Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.10683 , 2019a.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei
Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.10683 , 2019b.
Maithra Raghu, Ben Poole, Jon Kleinberg, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl Dickstein. On the expressive power
of deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume
70, pages 2847–2854. JMLR. org, 2017.
Oliver Richter and Roger Wattenhofer. Normalized attention without probability cage. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.09561 , 2020.
Corby Rosset. Turing-NLG: A 17-billion-parameter language model
by microsoft. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/
turing-nlg-a-17-billion-parameter-language-model-by-microsoft/ , 2020. Accessed:
2020-04-12.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of learning
in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120 , 2013.
Thiago Serra, Christian Tjandraatmadja, and Srikumar Ramalingam. Bounding and counting linear regions of
deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.02114 , 2017.
Or Sharir and Amnon Shashua. On the expressive power of overlapping architectures of deep learning. In 6th
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2018.
Or Sharir, Ronen Tamari, Nadav Cohen, and Amnon Shashua. Tractable generative convolutional arithmetic
circuits. 2016.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V Le. Efﬁcientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.11946 , 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio,
Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V . N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9
December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA , pages 5998–6008, 2017. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
7181-attention-is-all-you-need .
Andreas Veit, Michael J Wilber, and Serge Belongie. Residual networks behave like ensembles of relatively
shallow networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 550–558, 2016.
Chengwei Wang, Tengfei Zhou, Chen Chen, Tianlei Hu, and Gang Chen. Off-policy recommendation system
without exploration. In Paciﬁc-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 16–27.
Springer, 2020.
Zifeng Wu, Chunhua Shen, and Anton Van Den Hengel. Wider or deeper: Revisiting the resnet model for visual
recognition. Pattern Recognition , 90:119–133, 2019.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime G. Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V .
Le. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. In Hanna M.
Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Ro-
man Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, 8-14 December 2019,
Vancouver, BC, Canada , pages 5754–5764, 2019. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
8812-xlnet-generalized-autoregressive-pretraining-for-language-understanding .
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07146 , 2016.
15
Contents
A Upper bounds on the separation rank 16
A.1 The function realized by a deep multi-headed self-attention network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
A.2 Proof of the upper bound in theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
A.3 Proof of the upper bound in theorem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
A.4 The effect of residual connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
A.5 Technical lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
B Lower bounds on the separation rank 24
B.1 preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
B.1.1 Tensors and their matricization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
B.1.2 Grid tensors provide lower bounds for the separation rank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
B.1.3 Method for bounding the grid tensor’s rank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
B.2 Proof of the lower bounds in theorems 1 and 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
B.3 Technical lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
C Proof of Proposition 1 on the separation rank symmetry 31
D Experimental details 32
D.1 Fit details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
A Upper bounds on the separation rank
A.1 The function realized by a deep multi-headed self-attention network
In this subsection, we prove facts on the general structure of the function realized by the analyzed self-attention
architecture that will be of use to us in the upcoming proofs. For a cleaner presentation, we will rewrite eq. (3)
in vectorized notation:
Y=HX
h=1WO;hWV;hXXT
WK;hT
WQ;hX (12)
whereX;Y (X)2RdxNdenote matrices respectively holding xj,yj 
x1;:::;xN
in theirj’th column. Simi-
larly treating eq. (4), we will denote by YL;dx;H;(X)2RdxNthe matrix holding yj;L;dx;H; 
x1;:::;xN
in itsj’th column.
We begin by proving a lemma that reveals the structure of gLpresented in eq. (4):
Lemma 1. DeﬁningC(L):=3L 1
2, any depthLcomposition of the self-attention layers deﬁned in eq. (3)can
be written as:
YL;dx;H;=X
h2[H][C(L)]B(0;h)TM(1;h)M(C(L);h)A(0;h)X (13)
where8h2[H][C]0cC(L) :M(c;h)=A(c;h)XXTB(c;h)TandA(c;h);B(c;h)2Rdadx.
Proof. By Induction on L. Base case:
Y(1)(X) =HX
h=1WO;h
|{z}
BTWV;hXXT
WK;hT
|{z}
MWQ;h
|{z}
AX
16
Y(L+1)(X) =HX
h=1WO;hWV;hY(L)(X)Y(L)(X)T
WK;hT
WQ;hY(L)(X)
Now, substituting in the induction hypothesis on the structure of Y(L)(X)yields:
=HX
h=1WO;hWV;h0
@X
h12[H][C(L)]B(0;h1)TM(1;h1)M(C(L);h1)A(0;h1)X1
A
0
@X
h22[H][C(L)]XTA(0;h2)TM(C(L);h2)TM(1;h2)TB(0;h2)1
A
WK;hT
WQ;h
0
@HX
h32[H][C(L)]B(0;h3)TM(1;h3)M(C(L);h3)A(0;h3)X1
A
Finally unifying the summations over h;h1h2;h3to single sum over [H][C(L)3+1=C(L+1)]gives
X
h2[H][C(L+1)]WO;hWV;hB(0;h)T
|{z}
2RdxdaM(1;h)M(C(L);h)A(0;h)XXTA(0;h)T
|{z}
in the desired form of MM(C(L);h)TM(2;h)T(14)
M(1;h)TB(0;h)
WK;h(0)T
WQ;hB(0;h)T
| {z }
in the desired form of MM(1;h)M(C(L);h)A(0;h)X(15)
Note that the number of Munits, each with a summation on a different index j2[N], is3C(L) + 1 =
C(L+ 1) , implyingC(L) =3L 1
2as needed.
Corollary 3. DeﬁningC(L):=3L 1
2, any depthLcomposition of Lself-attention layers can be written as:
yi;L;dx;H;
x1;:::;xN
=NX
j1;:::;jC=1gL
xi;xj1;:::;xjC
(16)
Where
gL
xi;xj1;:::;xjC
:=X
h2[H][C(L)]daX
r1;:::;rC(L)+1=1h
B(0;h)i
r1;p0
@C(L)Y
c=1D
A(c;h)
rc;x(jc)ED
B(c;h)
rc+1;x(jc)E1
AD
A(0;h)
rC(L)+1;x(i)E
Proof. To get the required form, we will use lemma 1 above and write the matrix multiplication in eq. (13)
explicitly.
M(c;h)
r1;r2=NX
j=1h
A(c;h)Xi
r1;jh
XTB(c;h)Ti
j;r2=NX
j=1D
A(c;h)
r1;x(j)ED
B(c;h)
r2;x(j)E
Therefore
yi;L;dx;H;
p
x(1);:::;x(N)
=X
h2[H][C(L)]B(0;h)T
pM(1;h)M(C(L);h)A(0;h)x(i)
=NX
j1;:::;jC(L)=1X
h2[H][C(L)]daX
r1;:::;rC(L)+1=1
h
B(0;h)i
r1;p0
@C(L)Y
c=1D
A(c;h)
rc;x(jc)ED
B(c;h)
rc+1;x(jc)E1
AD
A(0;h)
rC(L)+1;x(i)E
In the next two subsections, we will use the above lemma 1 to prove the two competing upper bounds on the
separation rank of self-attention networks.
17
A.2 Proof of the upper bound in theorem 1
In the following theorem, we show how an upper bound on the separation rank is implied by the form of eq. (13)
in the statement of lemma 1.
Theorem 3. DeﬁningC(L):=3L 1
2, for any depth L1input sizeN > 1partitionP[Q= [N]and
output locations i2[N]; p2[dx], the following holds:
sep
yi;L;dx;H;
p;P;Q
(H(da+ 1))C(L)
Proof. We begin by writing the matrix multiplication in eq. (13) explicitly.
M(c;h)
r1;r2=NX
j=1h
A(c;h)Xi
r1;jh
XTB(c;h)Ti
j;r2=X
j2PD
A(c;h)
r1;x(j)ED
B(c;h)
r2;x(j)E
+X
j2QD
A(c;h)
r1;x(j)ED
B(c;h)
r2;x(j)E
Therefore, rewriting the summation to be over fPc2fP;QggC(L)
c=1that correspond to the two partition segments
P=Q .
yi;L;dx;H;
p
x(1);:::;x(N)
=X
h2[H][C(L)]B(0;h)T
pM(1;h)M(C(L);h)A(0;h)x(i)
=X
h2[H][C(L)]daX
r1;:::;rC(L)+1=1X
P1;:::;PC(L)2fP;Qg
B(0;h)
r1;p0
@C(L)Y
c=1X
j2PcD
A(c;h)
rc;x(j)ED
B(c;h)
rc+1;x(j)E1
AD
A(0;h)
rC(L)+1;x(i)E
Now we reorder the above sum by summing over indices of swaps between PandQ, i.e.2[C]such that
P6=P+1, and split the multiplicationQC(L)
c=1according to the crossing indices:
=X
h2[H][C(L)]daX
r1;:::;rC(L)+1=1C(L)X
b=0X
0=b+1<bb 1:::1<0=C(L)B(0;h)
r1;p
0
B@0
B@bb
2cY
m=02mY
c=2m+1+1X
j2PD
A(c;h)
rc;x(j)ED
B(c;h)
rc+1;x(j)E1
CAD
A(0;h)
rC(L)+1;x(i)E1
CA
0
B@db
2e 1Y
m=02m+1Y
c=2m+2+1X
j2QD
A(c;h)
rc;x(j)ED
B(c;h)
rc+1;x(j)E1
CA
Where we assume w.l.o.g that i2Pand therefore P1;P1+1;:::;P0 1;P0=P. The above reordering
allows pushing the summation of non swapping rcindices into the P;Q parentheses:
=X
h2[H][C(L)]C(L)X
b=0X
0=b+1<bb 1:::10=C(L)daX
r1+1;:::;rb+1=1B(0;h)
r1;p (17)
0
BBBBBBBBB@daX
rC(L)+1=1
|{z}
just for1<C
otherwise ignoredaX
r1=1|{z}
used either
inPorQ0
BBBBBBBBB@bb
2cY
m=0daX
r2m+1+2
...
r2m=12mY
c=2m+1+1X
j2PD
A(c;h)
rc;x(j)ED
B(c;h)
rc+1;x(j)E1
CCCCCCCCCAD
A(0;h)
rC(L)+1;x(i)E1
CCCCCCCCCA
| {z }
function ofP0
BBBBBB@daX
r1=1|{z}
used either
inPorQdb
2e 1Y
m=0daX
r2m+2+2;:::;r2m+1=12m+1Y
c=2m+2+1X
j2QD
A(c;h)
rc;x(j)ED
B(c;h)
rc+1;x(j)E1
CCCCCCA
| {z }
function ofQ
18
Since the separation rank of each term in the above summation is 1, we proved the following upper bound on the
separation rank:
sep
yi;L;dx;H;
p;P;Q
X
h2[H][C(L)]C(L)X
b=0X
0=b+1<bb 1:::10=C(L)daX
r1+1;:::;rb+1=11
=HC(L)C(L)X
b=0 
C(L)
b!
(da)b=HC(L)(da+ 1)C(L)= (H(da+ 1))C(L)
We note that unlike the dacase, the same Hindex can affect nonconsecutive M(c1;h);M(c2;h), therefore we
can’t simply push the hindices as done for the rindices in eq. (17).
From here, the upper bound in theorem 1 follows by
log3
sep
yi;L;dx;H;
p;P;Q
log3
(H(da+ 1))C(L)
=3L 1
2log3(dx+H) (18)
A.3 Proof of the upper bound in theorem 2
In the following theorem, we show how an upper bound on the separation rank is implied by the polynomial
degree ofyi;L;dx;H;
p in eq. (16). We will use the notation of  n
k– the multiset coefﬁcient, given in the
binomial form by n+k 1
k
. We will use the identity
a1:::an2Z0 :Pn
r=1ar=k	=  n
k
.
Theorem 4. DeﬁningC(L):=3L 1
2, for any depth L1input sizeN > 1partitionP[Q= [N]and
output locations i2[N]; p2[dx], the following holds:
sep
yi;L;dx;H;
p;P;Q
dx(C(L) + 1)  
dx
2C(L)!!2C(L)
dx+ 1dx
(19)
Proof. We begin by opening the inner products in eq. (16), explicitly writing the indices:
yi;L;dx;H;
p =NX
j1;:::;jC(L)=1X
h2[H][C(L)]daX
r1;:::;rC(L)+1=1B(0;h)
r1;p0
@C(L)Y
c=1D
A(c;h)
rc;x(jc)ED
B(c;h)
rc+1;x(jc)E1
AD
A(0;h)
rC(L)+1;x(i)E
=dxX
1;:::;C(L)+1;1;:::;C(L)=1NX
j1;:::;jC(L)=1X
h2[H][C(L)]daX
r1;:::;rC(L)+1=1
0
@B(0;h)
r1;pA(0;h)
rC(L)+1;C(L)+1x(i)
C(L)+1C(L)Y
c=1A(c;h)
rc;cx(jc)
cB(c;h)
rc;cx(jc)
c1
A
And separating between coefﬁcients and x’s:
=dxX
1;:::;C(L)+1;1;:::;C(L)=10
@X
h2[H][C(L)]daX
r1;:::;rC(L)+1=1B(0;h)
r1;pA(0;h)
rC(L)+1;C(L)+1C(L)Y
c=1A(c;h)
rc;cB(c;h)
rc;c1
A
| {z }
:=T1;:::;C(L)+1;1;:::;C(L)0
@NX
j1;:::;jC(L)=1x(i)
C(L)+1C(L)Y
c=1x(jc)
cx(jc)
c1
A
Now we can group monomials by the powers n1;:::;ndxof each coordinate
19
=dxX
C(L)+1X
n1+:::ndx=2C(L)
|{z}
The powers0
BBB@How to distributethe powers between the c’sz }| {X
!;:::;C(L);1;:::;C(L)2[dx]
8m2[dx]jfc2[C(L) :c=m]gj+jfc2[C(L) :c=m]gj=nmT1;:::;C(L)+1;1;:::;C(L)1
CCCA
n1::::;ndx;C(L)+1
x(1);:::; x(N)
Where:
n1::::;ndx;C(L)+1
x(1);:::; x(N)
:=X
o1++oN=C(L)|{z}
How manyjindices
equal to each [N]X
0n1;1;:::;ndx;N2C(L)
8m2[dx]PN
j=1nm;j=nm
8j2[N]Pdx
m=1nm;j=2oj|{z}
How to distribute the powers between [N]x(i)
C(L)+1NY
j=1dxY
m=1
x(j)
mnm;j
Finally, we need to bound the separation rank of n1::::;ndx;C(L)+1. W.l.o.g we choose the partition P=
1;:::;N
2	
;Q=N
2+ 1;:::;N	
andi2Pthen we can divide the powers between P;Q in the following
way:
n1::::;ndx;C(L)+1
x(1);:::; x(N)
=X
0r1;P;:::;rdx;P2C(L)
0r1;Q;:::;rdx;Q2C(L)
8m2[dx]rm;P+rm;Q=nmC(L)X
E=0
0
BBBBBBBB@X
o1++oN
2=EX
0n1;1;:::;ndx;N
22C(L)
8m2[dx]PN
j2Pnm;j=rm;P
8j2[N]Pdx
m=1nm;j=2ojx(i)
C(L)+1Y
j2PdxY
m=1
x(j)
mnm;j1
CCCCCCCCA
| {z }
function ofP0
BBBBBBBB@X
oN
2+1++oN=C(L) EX
0n1;1;:::;ndx;N
22C(L)
8m2[dx]PN
j2Qnm;j=rm;Q
8j2[N]Pdx
m=1nm;j=2ojY
j2QdxY
m=1
x(j)
mnm;j1
CCCCCCCCA
| {z }
function ofQ
Thus, since each summand is of separation rank 1, the separation rank of n1::::;ndx;C(L)+1is bounded by the
number of summands:
(C(L) + 1)dxY
=1  
2
r!!lemma 3z}|{
(C(L) + 1)2C(L)
dx+ 1dx
where the inequality followed from lemma 3. Since we have at most dx dx
2C(L)
differentwe conclude that:
sep
yi;L;dx;H;
p;P;Q
dx  
dx
2C(L)!!
|{z}
number of(C(L) + 1)2C(L)
dx+ 1dx
20
From here, theorem 2 follows by the multiset identity in lemma 4:
log3h
sep
yi;L;dx;H;
p;P;Qi
log3"
dx(C(L) + 1)  
dx
2C(L)!!2C(L)
dx+ 1dx#
(20)
log3"
dx(C(L) + 1)2e(dx+ 2C(L))
dxdx2C(L)
dx+ 1dx#
log3"
3Ldx(2e)dx3L 1
dx+ 12dx#
only for 3L>dxz}|{
 log3[3Ldx(2e)dx(23L 1
dx)2dx]
L+ log3dx+dxlog32e+ 2dxlog323L
dx
(2dx+ 1)L+ log3dx+ 2dx
log32p
2e log3dx
A.4 The effect of residual connections
Figure 5: A residual network in its compressed and unraveled form, taken from Veit et al. [2016].
Having upper-bounded the separation rank of the deep self-attention network deﬁned in section 2.2 of the main
text, we comment on the effect of adding residual connections over each layer, as is done in the regular network
(described in section 2.1 of the main text). Consider a network composed of a concatenation of the building
blocks shown in ﬁgure 5(a), taken from Veit et al. [2016]. A building block in layer lincludes a module fl,
which in our case is the self-attention layer given in eq. (3) of the main text,2and a skip connection which adds
fl’s input to its output (circles denote addition). Veit et al. [2016] propose an unraveled view of such a network,
shown in ﬁgure 5(b), which we will employ in the proof of theorem 5 for clarity of presentation.
We begin by proving a lemma that quantiﬁes how the separation rank of the composition of a self-attention layer
over a function is related to the function’s separation rank:
Lemma 2. Letgj2Rdxbe an input vector at position jto a self-attention layer deﬁned by eq. (3) of the main
text, and letKbe an upper bound to the separation rank of any of the entries p2[dx]of any input gj2Rdx,
i.e.,8p2[dx];j2[N] :Sep 
gj
p
K. Letyi
pbe thepth entry of the self-attention layer output at position i.
Then, an upper bound to the separation rank of yi
p2Ris given by:
Sep
yi
p
Nd4
x
HK3
Proof. Denote byG2RdxNthe matrix holding gj2Rdxin itsjth column. Note that by the conditions of
the lemma any entry of GupholdsSep(G)K. Writing eq. (3) of the main text as a summation over matrix
indices:
yi
p=HX
h=1dx=HX
1=1dxX
2=1NX
j=1dxX
4=1dx=HX
5=1dxX
6=1WO;h
p1WV;h
12G2j(G>)j4(WK;h)>
45WQ;h
56G6i (21)
2We have embedded the Feed-Forward layer within WOdue to the linearity of the analyzed model.
21
The lemma follows by multiplying the number of summed terms by an upper bound on the separation rank of
each summed term, K3.
We now prove a theorem which establishes that the integration of skip connections modiﬁes the upper bound in
theorem 1 of the main text by a small factor.
Theorem 5. Forp2[dx], letyi;L
pbe the scalar function computing the pth entry of an output vector at position
i2[N]of the depth-Lresidual network depicted in ﬁgure 5, where flis the self-attention layer in eq. (3) of the
main text. Then:
log3Sep(yL;i
p)Llog3L+ (4 log3dx+ log3N log3H)3L 1
2
Comparing this dependence to the upper bound in the theorem 1 of the main text, given in eq. (18), this theorem
implies that the effect of residual connections is insigniﬁcant to our analysis.
Proof. Observing ﬁgure 5(b) which gives the L= 3example, we upper bound the separation rank of the entire
unraveled network by noting that its output is composed from L+ 1additions of outputs from branches of depth
l= 0;::::;L (0being the direct link of the input to the output), such that schematically the separation rank at the
output of the entire network can be upper bounded by:
Sep(yL;i
p)(L+ 1)Sep(longest branch (L))
where we denoted longest branch (L)as the function at the output of fL, before the addition with the other
branches. Noting that the input to fLcan be recursively viewed as an output of an unraveled network of depth L 
1, we bound the separation rank of the function at the input to fLbyLSep(longest branch (L 1)). SincefLis a
self-attention layer, Lemma 2 implies that Sep(longest branch (L))Nd4
x
H(LSep(longest branch (L 1)))3.
Continuing recursively, and inserting the stopping condition Sep(longest branch (L= 1)) =Nd4
x
H(since the
input tof1is a speciﬁc entry of the input to the entire network, of separation rank 1), we attain:
Sep(yL;i
p)LY
l=1(l+ 1)Nd4
x
H3l 1
;
satisfying the theorem.
We now prove a theorem which establishes that the integration of skip connections modiﬁes the upper bound in
theorem 2 of the main text by a small factor.
Theorem 6. DeﬁningC(L):=3L 1
2, forp2[dx], letyi;L;dx;H;
p;residual be the scalar function computing the pth
entry of an output vector at position i2[N]of the depth-Lresidual network depicted in ﬁgure 5, where flis the
self-attention layer in eq. (3) of the main text. Then for any partition P[Q= [N], the following holds:
sep
yi;L;dx;H;
p;residual;P;Q
dx(C(L) + 1)2  
dx
2C(L)!!2C(L)
dx+ 1dx
Comparing this dependence to the upper bound in the theorem 2 of the main text, given in eq. (19), the above
theorem implies that the effect of residual connections is insigniﬁcant to our analysis.
Proof. We will adapt the proof of theorem 4. All of the arguments remain unchanged, except that we obtain the
network structure via lemma 5 instead of lemma 1. Following the new structure we will have two additional
summations, one over jand one over (see lemma 5), as well as an additional input Xfactor. We will leave
the summation over jduring the whole proof, thus multiplying the separation rank by at most C(L). Note that
similarity to the hsummation, the summation over has no inﬂuence on the separation rank, since it collapses
into a single coefﬁcient T. Finally the unput Xfactor contribute at most 1to the separation rank, therefore we
can bound the separation rank by C(L) + 1 times the bound in eq. (19).
Finally, since the upper bounds undergo such minor increases in the presence of skip connections, the lower
bounds can be left with no further tightening, without affecting the analysis and its conclusions.
22
A.5 Technical lemmas
Lemma 3. (inequality of arithmetic and geometric multiset coefﬁcient means)
Letn;k2Nand:Nk!N:=r1;:::rk`Qk
j=1 n
rj
then:
8rz;:::rk2N(r1;:::rk) Qn 1
t=1 M
k+tk
((n 1)!)k
whereM:=Pk
j=1rj
Proof. Deﬁneft:=Qk
j=1(rj+t)and :=Qn 1
t=1ftthan by the inequality of arithmetic and geometric
means
8t2[k]ft 
1
kkX
j=1(rj+t)!k
=M
k+tk
Therefore
(r1;:::;rk) =kY
j=1  
n
rj!!
=kY
j=1 
n+rj 1
rj!
=kY
j=1(n+rj 1)!
rj! (n 1)!
=1
((n 1)!)kkY
j=1n 1Y
t=1(rj+t) =1
((n 1)!)kn 1Y
t=1ftQn 1
t=1 M
k+tk
((n 1)!)k
One can see that when Mdivided bykit hold that
0
BB@ktimesz}|{
M
k;:::;M
k1
CCA=1
((n 1)!)kn 1Y
t=1ft=1
((n 1)!)kn 1Y
t=1M
k+tk
= n 1Y
t=1M
k+t!k
hence the name of this lemma.
Lemma 4.  n
k

2e(n+k)
nn
Proof. : by using the inequality n
k
 en
kkwe have
  
n
k!!
= 
n+k 1
n 1!
2e(n+k)
nn
We now prove a lemma which reveals the alternation to the network structure as expressed in eq. (13) when
taking skip connections into account.
Lemma 5. DeﬁningC(L):=3L 1
2, any depthLskip connection composition of the self-attention layers
deﬁned in eq. (3)can be written as:
YL;dx;H;=X+C(L)X
j=1njX
=1X
h2[H][j]B(0;h;j; )TM(1;h;j; )M(j;h;j; )A(0;h;j; )X (22)
where8j2[C(L)]nj0and82[nj]h2[H][j]0cj:M(c;h)=A(c;h)XXTB(c;h)Tand
A(c;h);B(c;h)2Rdadx.
Proof. By Induction on L. Base case:
Y(1)(X) =X+HX
h=1WO;h
|{z}
BTWV;hXXT
WK;hT
|{z}
MWQ;h
|{z}
AX
23
Y(L+1)(X) =HX
h=1WO;hWV;hY(L)(X)Y(L)(X)T
WK;hT
WQ;hY(L)(X)
Now, rewriting Y(L)asX+
Y(L) X
yields:
Y(L+1)(X) =X
E;F;G2fX;Y(L) XgHX
h=1WO;hWV;hEFT
WK;hT
WQ;hG
Now, substituting in the induction hypothesis on the structure of Y(L)(X)yields:
Y(L+1)(X) =X
E;F;G2
X;PC(L)
j=1Pnj
=1P
h2[H][j]B(0;h;j; )TM(1;h;j; )M(j;h;j; )A(0;h;j; )X
HX
h=1WO;hWV;hEFT
WK;hT
WQ;hG
Similarly to eq. (14) each of the 8terms in the outer summation is of the required form, thus we complete the
proof.
B Lower bounds on the separation rank
B.1 preliminaries
B.1.1 Tensors and their matricization
We begin by laying out basic concepts in tensor theory required for the upcoming analysis. The core concept of
atensor may be thought of as a multi-dimensional array. The order of a tensor is deﬁned to be the number of
indexing entries in the array, referred to as modes . The dimension of a tensor in a particular mode is deﬁned as
the number of values taken by the index in that mode. If Ais a tensor of order Nand dimension Miin each
modei2[N], its entries are denoted Ad1:::dN, where the index in each mode takes values di2[Mi].
We will make use of the concept of the matricization ofAw.r.t. the balanced partition (I;J), denoted JAKI;J2
RMN=2MN=2, which is essentially the arrangement of the tensor elements as a matrix whose rows correspond
toIand columns to J. SupposeA2RMMis a tensor of order N, and let (I;J)be a balanced partition of
[N],i.e.IandJare disjoint sizeN=2subsets of [N]whose union gives [N]. The matricization ofAw.r.t. the
partition (I;J), denoted JAKI;J, is theMN=2-by-MN=2matrix holding the entries of Asuch thatAd1:::dNis
placed in row index 1 +PN=2
t=1(dit 1)MN=2 tand column index 1 +PN=2
t=1(djt 1)MN=2 t.
B.1.2 Grid tensors provide lower bounds for the separation rank
We now present the concept of grid tensors, which are a form of function discretization [Hackbusch, 2012].
Essentially, the function is evaluated for a set of points on an exponentially large grid in the input space
and the outcomes are stored in a tensor. Formally, ﬁxing a set of template vectors x(1);:::; x(M)2Rdx,
the points on the grid are the set f(x(d1);:::; x(dN))gM
d1;:::;dN=1. Given a function y(x1;:::; xN), the set
of its values on the grid arranged in the form of a tensor are called the grid tensor induced by y, denoted
A(y)d1;:::;dNy(x1=x(d1);:::; xN=x(dN)).
The following claim establishes a fundamental relation between a function’s separation rank (see section 3) and
the rank of the matrix obtained by the corresponding grid tensor matricization. This relation, which holds for all
functions, is formulated below for functions realized by self-attention networks:
Claim 1. Forp2[dx], letyi;L;dx;H;
p be the scalar function computing the pth entry of an output vector at
positioni2[N]of the depth- Lself-attention network with hidden dimension dxandHattention heads per
layer, deﬁned in eqs. (3)and(4). Then, for any integer Mand any set of template vectors x(1);:::; x(M)2Rdx
it holds that:
sep(I;J)
yi;L;dx;H;
p
rank
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;J
; (23)
whereA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )is the grid tensor of yi;L;dx;H;
p with respect to the above template vectors.
Proof. Ifsep(I;J) 
yi;L;dx;H;
p
=1then the inequality is trivially satisﬁed. Otherwise, assume that
sep(I;J) 
yi;L;dx;H;
p
=K2N, and letfgI
;gJ
gK
=1be the functions of the respective decomposition
24
to a sum of separable functions, i.e. that the following holds:
yi;L;dx;H;
p (x1;:::; xN) =KX
=1gI
(xj:j2I)gJ
(xj:j2J):
Then, by deﬁnition of the grid tensor, for any template vectors x(1);:::; x(M)2Rdxthe following equality
holds:
A(yi;L;dx;H;
p )d1;:::;dN=KX
=1gI
(x(dj):j2I)gJ
(x(dj):j2J)
KX
=1V
dj:j2[I]U
dj:j2[J];
whereVandUare the tensors holding the values of gI
andgJ
, respectively, at the points deﬁned by the
template vectors. Under the matricization according to the (I;J)partition, it holds that JVKI;Jand JUKI;J
are column and row vectors, respectively, which we denote by vanduT
. It follows that the matricization of
the grid tensor is given by:
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;J=KX
=1vuT
;
which means that rank 
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;J
K= sep(I;J) 
yi;L;dx;H;
p
.
B.1.3 Method for bounding the grid tensor’s rank
Claim 1 assures us that the separation rank of the function realized by a self-attention network is lower bounded
by the rank of the matrix obtained by the corresponding grid tensor matricization, for any choice of template
vectors. Speciﬁcally:
sep(I;J)
yi;L;dx;H;
p
rank
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;J
:
Thus, proving that rank 
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;J
is higher than the lower bounds stated in theorems 1 and 2 for
all of the values of the parameters but a set of Lebesgue measure zero, would satisfy the theorems.
We note that since the network’s operation is polynomial in , then the entries of the grid tensor are also
polynomial. Sharir et al. [2016] prove a claim regarding the prevalence of the maximal matrix rank for matrices
whose entries are polynomial functions. Essentially, they show that it sufﬁces to ﬁnd a single conﬁguration of
the parameters, denoted 2RK(whereKis the number of scalar parameters), for which the resultant matrix is
of rankr, in order to show the rank is at least rfor all conﬁgurations in RKbut a set of measure zero in RK.
For simplicity of the proof we will ﬁnd a single conﬁguration 2CKfor which the resultant matrix is of the
required rank. We therefore modify the original claim to ﬁt this setting, still proving the rank is lower bounded
for all conﬁgurations in RKbut a set of measure zero in RK:
Claim 2. LetM;N;K2N,1rminfM;Ngand anMNmatrixAwhere each entry is a polynomial
mappingAijoverKvariables for every i2[M]andj2[N]. If there exists a point 2FK, where Fis either
RorC, s.t. rank(A())r, then the setf2RK:rank(A())<rghas zero measure (w.r.t. the Lebesgue
measure over RK).
Proof. (based on a proof in Sharir et al. [2016]) Recall that rank (A())riff there exits a non-zero rr
minor ofA(). Note that a minor of A()is polynomial in the entries of A(), and so it is polynomial in as
well. Letc= M
r
 N
rbe the number of minors in A, denote the minors by ffi()gc
i=1, and deﬁne a new
polynomial function f() =Pc
i=1fi()2. It thus holds that f() = 0 iff for alli2[c]it holds thatfi() = 0 ,
i.e.f() = 0 iffrank (A())<r.
Now,f()is a polynomial in the entries of , and so it either vanishes on a set of zero measure in RK, or it is
the zero polynomial (see Caron and Traynor [2005] for proof). Since we assumed that there exists 2FKs.t.
rank(A())r, the latter option is not possible.
B.2 Proof of the lower bounds in theorems 1 and 2
In this section, we show there exists an assignment for the weight matrices of a self-attention network, along
with a speciﬁc choice of template vectors, for which rank 
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;J
surpasses the lower bounds
stated in theorems 1 and 2 in the appropriate depth to width ratios. In accordance with Claim 2, the lower bounds
in the theorems will follow since such an assignment implies this rank is achieved for all conﬁgurations of the
self-attention network weights but a set of Lebesgue measure zero.
25
Proof. (of lower bounds in theorems 1 and 2).
Relying on claim 1 we will bound the separation rank from below via the rank of the matricization
w.r.t. a partition (I;J)of a grid tensor induced by yi;L;dx;H;
p , computed by any set of template vectors:
sep(I;J) 
yi;L;dx;H;
p
rank 
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;J. Relying on claim 2, we ensure that the rank of
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;Jis above a certain value almost everywhere by ﬁnding an assignment of the network
parameters for which it achieves this value.
Lemma 6 assures us that for any matrix V2RM=2(dx H)=2withl2normalized rows, there exists a choice
ofM+ 1template vectors x(1);:::; x(M+1)2Rdx, as well as an assignment to the self-attention network
weights for which:
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )K~I;~J=Const.
VVT(3L 2)
; (24)
where JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )K~I;~Jis a sub-matrix of the grid tensor matricization JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;Jof sizeM=2
M=2andrepresents the Hadamard power operation, i.e., 
Ak
ij=Ak
ij:Since proving the existence of a
sub-matrix of a certain rank lower-bounds the rank of the full matrix by this rank, it sufﬁces to ﬁnd a matrix V
such that rank 
VVT(3L 2)
upholds the stated dependence.
Noting that the operation of raising a rank rmatrix to the Hadamard power of presults in a matrix upper
bounded by
r
p
(see proof in Amini et al. [2012] for example) with the notation of the multiset coefﬁcient
  n
k
:= n+k 1
k, and that the rank of VVTis upper bounded by(dx H)=2, we choose the dimension
M=2=
(dx H)=2
3L 2
to facilitate the rank increase.
For this choice, observe that it sufﬁces to prove that the sub-matrix JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )K~I;~J2RM=2M=2is
fully ranked in order to satisfy the theorems. This follows by using the identity n
k
 n
kkwe have:
  n
k
= n+k 1
k
= n+k 1
n 1
max n 1
k+ 1k;
k
n 1+ 1n 1
And accordingly:
(dx H)=2
3L 2
max((dx H)=2 1
3L 2+ 13L 2
;3L 2
(dx H)=2 1+ 1(dx H)=2 1)
and the log of this bounds the expressions in the theorems’ lower bounds, where for each regime the tighter
lower bound is used.
Deﬁning for brevity d:=(dx H)=2and:= 3L 2, it remains only to ﬁnd a speciﬁc matrix V2R( (d
) )dwith
l2normalized rows such that the operation of taking the rank dmatrixVV>to the Hadamard power of would
result in a fully ranked matrix. We will provide such a matrix, and prove for it that:

VV>
=( (d
) )X
k=1a(k)
b(k)(25)
forfa(k)g( (d
) )
k=1andfb(k)g( (d
) )
k=1which are two sets of linearly independent vectors.
For;2[  d

], observing an entry of 
VV>:

VV>
=
VV>
= dX
r=1v()
rv()
r!
= (26)
X
k1++kd=

k1;:::;kd"dY
r=1
v()
rkr#""dY
r=1
v()
rkr##
(27)
where the ﬁrst equality follows from the deﬁnition of the Hadamard power, in the section we denoted v()
r;v()
r
as therth entries in rows andofV, and in the second line we expanded the power with the multinomial
identity. Identifying the form of eq. (27) with the schematic form of eq. (25), it remains to ﬁnd a speciﬁc
matrixV2R( (d
) )dwithl2normalized rows for which the size  d

setn
a(k1;:::;kd)o
k1++kd=is linearly
independent, where a(k1;:::;kd)
 =Qd
r=1
v()
rkr.
26
We show this is the case for Vin which the rows are each associated with one of  d
conﬁgurations
of distributing dinteger numbers that sum up to ,i.e., in which each row is associated with speciﬁcn
q
1;:::;q
d0;Pd
r=1q
r=o
. Explicitly, we take the rows v()
rto be:
8r2[d] :v()
r=
q
r=r
Pd
r0=1
2q
r0
Given thisV, each vector in the above deﬁned setn
a(k1;:::;kd)o
k1++kd=is equal to:
a(k1;:::;kd)
 =dY
r=1
v()
rkr=dY
r=10
@
q
r
qPd
r0=1
2q
r01
Akr
=Qd
r=1
q
rkr
Qd
r=1Pd
r0=1
2q
r0kr
2
= dX
r0=1
2q
r0! 
2
h

Pd
r=1q
rkri
Observing that the factor attained from the normalization depends only on the rows and doesn’t vary with
the different vectors labeled by (k1;:::;kd), we note it does not affect their linear dependence (amounts to a
multiplication by a diagonal matrix with non-zero entries on the diagonal - does not affect the rank).
We prove that the setn
^a(k1;:::;kd)o
k1++kd=for^a(k1;:::;kd)
 = 
Pd
r=1q
rkris linearly independent by
arranging it as the columns of the matrix A2R( (d
) )( (d
) ), and showing that Ais fully ranked.
Since the elements of Aare polynomial in 
, then as lemma 7 shows, it is sufﬁcient to show that there exists a
single contributor to the determinant of Athat has the highest degree of 
in order to ensure that the matrix is
fully ranked for all values of 
but a ﬁnite set, so 
should simply be chosen to be any number that is outside of
this set. Observing the summands of the determinant, i.e. 
P
q1++qd=hq;(q)i, whereis a permutation on
the columns of A, lemma 8 assures us the existence of a strictly maximal contributor, satisfying the conditions of
lemma 7, thus the setn
^a(k1;:::;kd)o
k1++kd=is linearly independent, and the lower bounds in the theorems
follow.
B.3 Technical lemmas
The following lemma details the assignment of the self-attention network weights and the choice of template
vectors which help us establish theorem 1.
Lemma 6. For any balanced partition of [N], denoted (I;J), for any even M, and for any matrix
V2RM=2(dx H)=2with rows that are l2normalized, there exists a choice of M+ 1 template vectors
x(1);:::; x(M+1)2Rdx, as well as an assignment to the self-attention network weights, for which:
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )K~I;~J=Const.
VVT3L 2
; (28)
where JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )K~I;~Jis a sub-matrix of the grid tensor matricization JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;Jof sizeM=2
M=2andrepresents the Hadamard power operation, i.e., 
Ak
ij=Ak
ij.
Proof. We present below a choice of weights and template vectors that yields the stated form for a sub-matrix of
JA(yi;L;dx;H;
p )KI;J. Subsequently we will plug these values into the self-attention operation stated in eq. (3),
and prove that this form follows.
Though the proof has many technical details, it has 3 essential parts. We ﬁrst choose the weights of the ﬁrst
layer so that the outputs in all locations are the same and equal to a summation of the input vectors. Because
the weight matrices are not dxdxbut are decomposed through the attention dimension dadxordxda,
then we divide the coordinates of the dx-dimensional vectors into contiguous segments of length da, and set
the weights to either project these segments to the da-dimensional space or invert this mapping with added
zero-padding. For the second part, we set the key and query matrices to use the same “projections” we used
in the ﬁrst layer to compute inner-products between each segment, while setting the value and output matrices
to preserve each head’s segment (with zero-padded coordinates). For the remainder of the network’s layers,
we use the previous step to compute increasingly larger powers of the norm of the vector computed in the ﬁrst
layer, by reconstructing the squared-norm from the inner products of each segment. The template vectors (and
parameters) are chosen such that the square of this norm will be equal to VVT.
27
The assignment to the network weights:
WV;1;h
i;j =1
N8
>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>><
>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>:1i=j da(h 1)da(h 1)<jda(h 1) +da 1
2
0<ida 1
2
i1i=j da(h 1) da 1
2da(h 1) +da 1
2<jdah 1
0<ida 1
2
 1i=j da(h 1)da(h 1)<jda(h 1) +da 1
2
da 1
2<ida 1
 i1i=j da(h 1) da 1
2da(h 1) +da 1
2<jdah 1
da 1
2<ida 1
1 j=dah;da 1
2<ida
0 Otherwise
WO;l;h
i;j =(
1j=i da(h 1)da(h 1)<idah
0 Otherwise
81<l<L;WV;l;h
i;j =(
1i=j da(h 1)da(h 1)<jdah
0 Otherwise
WV;L;h
i;j =i1j=da
WK;1;h
i;j =WQ;1;h
i;j = 1i=1^j=da
WK;2;h
i;j =WQ;2;h
i;j =8
><
>:1i=j da(h 1)da(h 1)<jda(h 1) +da 1
2
0<ida 1
2
0 Otherwise
8l>2;WK;l;h
i;j =WQ;l;h
i;j =(
1i= 1^jmodda6= 0
0Otherwise
In the above, we denoted the complex root of  1asi, to differentiate it from the index i. The choice of template
vectors:
x(i)
j=8
>>><
>>>:Vi;(j) iM=2^(j 1) modda<da 1
2
Vi M=2+1;(j da 1
2)M
2<iM^da 1
2(j 1) modda<da 1
1 ( j 1) modda=da 1
0 Otherwise
where(j)bj 1=dac(da 1) + (j 1 modda) + 1 .
W.l.o.g. we can assume that I=f1;:::;N=2g;J=fN=2+ 1;:::;Ng. We examine the sub-matrix deﬁned by
the following indices:
~I=f(i1;:::;iN=2) : 1i1M=2^8k>1;ik=M+ 1g (29)
~J=f(j1;:::;jN=2) :M=2<j1M^8k>1;jk=M+ 1g (30)
With all of the above in place, we are ready to prove that the resulting sub-matrix has the form of eq. (28). We
begin with the output of the ﬁrst self-attention layer:
y(1;i)(x(d1);:::; x(dN))k=NX
j=1HX
h=1D
WQ;1;hx(di);WK;1;hx(dj)E
(WO;1;hWV;1;hx(dj))k (31)
1=NX
j=1HX
h=1=1z}|{
x(di)
da=1z}|{
x(dj)
da(WO;1;hWV;1;hx(dj))k (32)
2=  HX
h=1WO;1;hWV;1;h!
x(i1)+x(j1)+ (N 2)x(M+1)!
k(33)
3=8
><
>:1 ( k 1) modda=da 1
Vi1;(k)+iVj1;(k) (k 1) modda<da 1
2
1 Vi1;(k da 1
2) iVj1;(k da 1
2)Otherwise(34)
28
where (1)is becauseWQ;1;h=WK;1;hare matrices that are zero everywhere except for entry (1;da),(2)
because when summing over the locations, only i1andj1are different from M+ 1, and (3)because applying
the value and output matrices on any template vector uresults in:

WO;1;hWV;1;hu
k=daX
=1WO;1;h
k;dxX
=1WV;1;h
;u (35)
=daX
=1WO;1;h
k;^uz }| {8
><
>:udah+ 1+iudah+ 1+da 1
2da 1
2
1
N udah+ 1 iudah+ 1+da 1
2da 1
2<da 1
1
NOtherwise(36)
=(
^u((k 1) modda)+1da(h 1)k<dah
0(37)
At this point, notice that for any i2[N],y(1;i)is the same, and we denote it with v. Note that it is a
vector composed of Hda-dimensional sub-vectors, each composed of ada 1
2-dimensional sub-vector and its
complement in the nextda 1
2indices, followed by a ﬁxed value of 1.
Next, we will compute the result of the second layer, where we use the fact that every position is equal to vto
drop the reference to a speciﬁc location i, i.e., y(l;i)=y(l):
y(2)
k=NHX
h=1D
WQ;2;hv;WK;2;hvE
(WO;2;hWV;2;hv)k (38)
=NHX
h=1D
~v(h);~v(h)E
v(h); (39)
where we used the notation v(h)
k=vk1da(h 1)k<dah, i.e., a vector that is equal to vkon the
h’thda-dimensional segment and otherwise ﬁlled with zeros, as well as the notation ~v(h)
k=vk
1da(h 1)kda(h 1)+da 1
2. The last equality is because all matrices in this layer essentially just project
theda-dimensional sub-vector of vfor its respective head h.
For the third layer we get:
y(3)=NHX
h=1D
WQ;2;hy(2);WK;2;hy(2)E
(WO;2;hWV;2;hy(2)) (40)
1=NHX
h=10
@X
rmodda6=0y(2)
r1
A2
y(2);h(41)
2=NHX
h=1 
NHX
h0=1D
~v(h0);~v(h0)E!2
ND
~v(h);~v(h)E
v(h)(42)
3=N4k~vk4HX
h=1D
~v(h);~v(h)E
v(h); (43)
where we deﬁne ~v=PH
h=1~v(h). Equality (1)is because in both WK;3;handWQ;3;hon the ﬁrst row is
nonzero, and it has ones everywhere except in coordinates that are multiples of da, resulting in summing
over all of these non-zero elements of the vector y(2). Equality (2)is because in the vector v(h)every entry
has a corresponding entry equal to its complement, which upon summation is equal to one, leaving only theD
~v(h0);~v(h0)E
coefﬁcients of the vector y(2). Equality (3)is because
k~vk2=h~v;~vi=X
h1;h2D
~v(h1);~v(h2)E
=HX
h=1D
~v(h);~v(h)E
; (44)
where the last equality stems from the fact that every ~v(h)is non-zero on a different segment of its dxcoordinates.
For any subsequent layer l<L we use the same set of parameters, and since the input of each preceding layer
has the same form of y(l)=Nlk~vk2lPH
h=1D
~v(h);~v(h)E
v(h), then we can just compute its recurrence
29
relation:
y(l+1)=NHX
h=1 
Nlk~vk2lHX
h0=1D
~v(h0);~v(h0)E!2
Nlk~vk2lD
~v(h);~v(h)E
v(h)(45)
=N1+3lk~vk6lHX
h=1 HX
h0=1D
~v(h0);~v(h0)E!2D
~v(h);~v(h)E
v(h)(46)
=N3l+1k~vk2(3l+2)HX
h=1D
~v(h);~v(h)E
v(h)(47)
)l+1= 3l+ 1;l+1= 3l+ 2 (48)
Using the initial conditions of 3= 4and3= 2, we get that l=3l 1 1
2;l= 3l 2 1. For theL’th layer,
the only difference is that WV;L;his deﬁned such that it returns a 1-hot vector that picks the da’th element of
the previous step. Putting it all together we get:
y(L)
k=N3L 1 1
2k~vk2(3l 2 1)HX
h=1D
~v(h);~v(h)E
iv(h)
da(49)
y(L)
k=N3L 1 1
2ik~vk23l 2(50)
Finally, we can evaluate k~vk2:
k~vk2=dxX
k=1~v2
k=HX
h=1da 1=2X
k=1(Vi1;(da 1)(h 1)+k+iVj1;(da 1)(h 1)+k)2(51)
=normalized)=1z}|{
HX
h=1da 1=2X
k=1V2
i1;(da 1)(h 1)+k normalized)=1z}|{
HX
h=1da 1=2X
k=1V2
j1;(da 1)(h 1)+k (52)
2iHX
h=1da 1=2X
k=1Vi1;(da 1)(h 1)+kVj1;(da 1)(h 1)+k (53)
= 2i(VVT)i1;j1; (54)
which concludes the proof.
Next, we show two lemmas that aid in the proof of the lower bound. We ﬁrst quote an identity by which for a
matrix with entries that are polynomials in x, if a single contributor to the determinant has the highest degree of
x, then the matrix is fully ranked for all values of xbut a ﬁnite set.
Lemma 7. (from Levine et al. [2018a]). Let A2RNNbe a matrix whose entries are polynomials in x2R.
In this case, its determinant may be written as det(A) =P
2SNsgn()p(x), whereSNis the symmetric
group onNelements and p(x)are polynomials deﬁned by p(x)QN
i=1Ai(i)(x);82Sn. Additionally,
let there exist such that deg(p(x))>deg(p(x))86= . Then, for all values of xbut a ﬁnite set, Ais
fully ranked.
Proof. We show that in this case det(A), which is a polynomial in xby its deﬁnition, is not the zero poly-
nomial. Accordingly, det(A)6= 0 for all values of xbut a ﬁnite set. Denoting tdeg(p(x)), since
t>deg(p(x))86= , a monomial of the form cxt;c2Rnf0gexists inp(x)and doesn’t exist in any
p(x); 6= . This implies that det(A)is not the zero polynomial, since its leading term has a non-vanishing
coefﬁcientsgn()c6= 0, and the lemma follows from the basic identity: det(A)6= 0()Ais fully
ranked.
The following quoted lemma, establishes a relation referred to as the vector rearrangement inequality , which
helped us ensure that our matrix of interest upholds the conditions of lemma 7 and is thus fully ranked.
Lemma 8. (from Levine et al. [2018a]). Let fv(i)gN
i=1be a set ofNdifferent vectors in RRsuch that
8i2[N]; j2[R] :v(i)
j0. Then, for all 2SNsuch that6=IN, whereSNis the symmetric group on
N, it holds that:
NX
i=1D
v(i);v((i))E
<NX
i=1v(i)2
:
30
Proof. We rely on theorem 368 in [Hardy et al., 1952], which implies that for a set of non-negative numbers
fa(1);:::;a(N)gthe following holds for all 2SN:
NX
i=1a(i)a((i))NX
i=1(a(i))2; (55)
with equality obtained only for which upholds (i) =j()a(i)=a(j). The above relation, referred to as
therearrangement inequality , holds separately for each component j2[R]of the given vectors:
NX
i=1v(i)
jv((i))
jNX
i=1(v(i)
j)2:
We now prove that for all 2SNsuch that6=IN,9^j2[R]for which the above inequality is hard, i.e.:
NX
i=1v(i)
^jv((i))
^j<NX
i=1(v(i)
^j)2: (56)
By contradiction, assume that 9^6=INfor which8j2[R]:
NX
i=1v(i)
jv(^(i))
j =NX
i=1(v(i)
j)2:
From the conditions of achieving equality in the rearrangement inequality deﬁned in Equation (55), it holds
that8j2[R] :v(^(i))
j =v(i)
j, trivially entailing: v(^(i))=v(i). Thus, ^6=INwould yield a contradiction
tofv(i)gN
i=1being a set of Ndifferent vectors in RR. Finally, the hard inequality of the lemma for 6=INis
implied from Equation (56):
NX
i=1D
v(i);v((i))E
NX
i=10
@RX
j=1v(i)
jv((i))
j1
A=RX
j=1 NX
i=1v(i)
jv((i))
j!
<RX
j=1 NX
i=1(v(i)
j)2!
=NX
i=1v(i)2
:
C Proof of Proposition 1 on the separation rank symmetry
Claim 3. For any depth L1input sizeN > 1and output locations i2[N]; p2[dx]The separation rank
w.r.t. balanced partitions, which obey A[B= [N];jAj;jBj=N=2, is invariant to the identity of the partition,
i.e.,8A[B= [N];~A[~B= [N]; s:t:jAj;jBj;j~Aj;j~Bj=N=2:
sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ;A;B) =sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ;~A;~B) (57)
Proof. We will denote A=
a1;:::;aN
2
,B=
b1;:::;bN
2
,~A=
~a1;:::; ~aN
2
,~B=
~b1;:::; ~bN
2
and
by2SNthe unique permutation that satisfy
8m2N
2
(am) = ~am^(bm) =~bm
w.l.o.g we will assume that a1= ~a1=i.
Assuming that sep(y;A;B) =R, then there exist g1;:::;gR;g0
1;:::;g0
Rs.t.
8x(1);:::; x(N)2Rdxyi;L;dx;H;
p
x(1);:::; x(N)
=RX
v=1gv 
x(a1);:::; x
aN
2!
g0
v 
x(b1);:::; x
bN
2!
i=(a1) =a1therefore the summations over j1;:::;jNin eq. (16) implies that for any x(1);:::;x(N)2Rdx
we have
yi;L;dx;H;
p
x(1);:::; x(N)
=yi;L;dx;H;
p
x((1));:::; x((N))
And therefore
=RX
v=1gv 
x((a1));:::; x

aN
2!
g0
v 
x((b1));:::; x

bN
2!
=RX
v=1gv 
x( ~a1);:::; x
~aN
2!
g0
v 
x(~b1);:::; x
~bN
2!
31
So we proved that
sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ;~A;~B)sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ;A;B)
Finally by switching the roles of ~A;~BandA;B we can get the inverse inequality so we conclude that
sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ;~A;~B) =sep(yi;L;dx;H;
p ;A;B)
D Experimental details
We conducted the network training described in section 5 of the main text with Adam optimizer for 1Msteps
and a batch size of 512sequences of 128tokens. All experiments used a learning rate schedule with a 12000
step linear warm-up followed by a cosine decay to zero. In order to increase width without changing other
architectural parameters, we kept the number of heads per layer constant at 2(experimental evidence indicates
that many heads per layer are not crucial [Michel et al., 2019, Kaplan et al., 2020], as does our theoretical
analysis which shows that the number of heads per layer affects the separation rank logarithmically).
Table 2 shows the per-depth widths of the trained architecture. More experiments were conducted per adjacent
depth pairs in order to identify the transition point accurately, and reduce the error bars in ﬁgure 3. Table 3
details the different standard deviation of repeating the training and evaluation experiment 3times per the given
architectures.
D.1 Fit details
The estimated experimental transition points between the two depth-efﬁciency regimes that were collected
according to the procedure described in section 5.2.2 are given in table 4. For the linear ﬁt we set xito be the
depth andyithe log of the estimated width at the measured transition point (with an empirical error icalculated
as in table 4).
The2
redmeasure is calculated by:
2=nX
i=1(yi ^yi)2
2
i(58)
2
red=2
df
where ^yiis the predicted value of the i-th sample according to the ﬁtting function given by the ﬁt parameters
aandbin eq. 11, and df=n m= 3 is the number of observations n= 5 minus the number of ﬁtted
parametersm= 2. The attained value of 2
red= 0:854indicates a good ﬁt for such a low n, though hinting
at a slight overestimation of the empirical errors. This may arise due to the limitations in attaining very dense
measurements around the transition points (though as can be seen in table 2, we made an effort to sample the
loss densely around the transitions).
TheR2measure is calculated by:
R2= 1 0
@Pn
i=1
1
2
i(yi ^yi)2
Pn
i=1
1
2
i(yi y)21
A (59)
where y=1
nPn
i=1
1
2
iyi
. The attained value of R2= 0:998indicates a good linear ﬁt of the data.
32
L=6 L=12 L=18 L=24 L=30 L=36 L=48
128 88 - 64 - - 44
168 120 - 88 - - 60
184 130 - - - - -
192 136 - - - - -
200 142 - - - - -
208 148 116 - - - -
216 152 124 104 - - 72
220 156 - - - - -
224 158 130 112 - - 80
236 168 - 88 - - 60
248 176 144 128 - - 88
272 192 - 136 - - 96
296 208 - 144 - - 104
320 224 184 160 144 128 112
376 264 216 184 168 152 128
- 272 244 - - - -
- 280 228 - - - -
408 288 232 200 176 160 144
- 296 240 - - - -
- 304 248 - - - -
- 308 252 - - - -
- 314 256 - - - -
456 320 264 224 200 184 160
- 328 268 - - - -
- 240 278 - - - -
496 352 288 248 224 200 176
568 400 320 280 248 232 200
- - 360 312 - - -
680 480 384 336 304 272 240
- - 406 352 - - -
- - 416 360 - - -
- - 424 368 - - -
- - 434 376 - - -
- - 440 376 - - -
- - 448 388 - - -
- - 456 396 - - -
- - 464 402 - - -
816 576 472 408 368 336 288
960 680 560 480 432 392 336
1088 768 624 544 484 440 384
- - - 552 494 - -
- - - 560 504 - -
- - - 568 508 - -
- - - 576 512 - -
- - - 584 522 - -
- - - 592 530 - -
- - - 600 536 - -
1416 1000 816 704 632 576 496
- - - - 712 648 -
- - - - 760 696 -
- - - - 808 736 -
- - - - 840 768 -
- - - - 896 816 -
2128 1504 1232 1064 952 872 752
- - - - 992 904 -
2832 2000 - 1416 1264 1160 1000
Table 2: The widths dxof the different trained networks. In order to improve the estimation of the
data points and their empirical error for the ﬁt in section 5.2.2, we performed dense measurements
around potential transition points.
33
dx= 320dx= 680dx= 800
1.92E-03 2.06E-03 6.51E-04
(a) L = 6
dx= 224dx= 400dx= 680dx= 1000
2.08E-03 1.65E-03 1.33E-03 1.20E-03
(b) L = 12
dx= 160dx= 280dx= 480dx= 704
7.36E-04 1.02E-03 1.48E-03 7.76E-04
(c) L = 24
Table 3: The standard deviation of the test loss for networks of varying widths and depths, when
repeating the training and evaluation experiment 3times per point.
L dxdx
6 214 6
12 308 12
18 436 20
24 572 12
30 824 16
(a) The identiﬁed transition points. (logdx) =1
dxdxLlogdx (logdx)
6 5.37 2.80e-2
12 5.73 3.90e-2
18 6.08 4.59e-2
24 6.35 2.10e-2
30 6.71 1.94e-2
(b) Log space conversion for the linear ﬁt.
Table 4: The collected depth-efﬁciency regime transition widths per depth.
34