Title: Can AI-Generated Text be Reliably Detected?

Can AI-Generated Text be Reliably Detected?
Vinu Sankar Sadasivan
vinu@umd.eduAounon Kumar
aounon@umd.edu
Sriram Balasubramanian
sriramb@umd.eduWenxiao Wang
wwx@umd.eduSoheil Feizi
sfeizi@umd.edu
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
Abstract
The rapid progress of large language models (LLMs) has made them capable of
performing astonishingly well on various tasks including document completion
and question answering. The unregulated use of these models, however, can
potentially lead to malicious consequences such as plagiarism, generating fake
news, spamming, etc. Therefore, reliable detection of AI-generated text can be
critical to ensure the responsible use of LLMs. Recent works attempt to tackle this
problem either using certain model signatures present in the generated text outputs
or by applying watermarking techniques that imprint speciﬁc patterns onto them.
In this paper, both empirically and theoretically, we show that these detectors
are not reliable in practical scenarios. Empirically, we show that paraphrasing
attacks , where a light paraphraser is applied on top of the generative text model,
can break a whole range of detectors, including the ones using the watermark-
ing schemes as well as neural network-based detectors and zero-shot classiﬁers.
Our experiments demonstrate that retrieval-based detectors, designed to evade
paraphrasing attacks, are still vulnerable against recursive paraphrasing. We then
provide a theoretical impossibility result indicating that as language models be-
come more sophisticated and better at emulating human text, the performance of
even the best-possible detector decreases. For a sufﬁciently advanced language
model seeking to imitate human text, even the best-possible detector may only
perform marginally better than a random classiﬁer. Our result is general enough to
capture speciﬁc scenarios such as particular writing styles, clever prompt design,
or text paraphrasing. We also extend the impossibility result to include the case
where pseudorandom number generators are used for AI-text generation instead
of true randomness. We show that the same result holds with a negligible cor-
rection term for all polynomial-time computable detectors. Finally, we show that
even LLMs protected by watermarking schemes can be vulnerable against spoof-
ing attacks where adversarial humans can infer hidden LLM text signatures and
add them to human-generated text to be detected as text generated by the LLMs,
potentially causing reputational damage to their developers. We believe these
results can open an honest conversation in the community regarding the ethical
and reliable use of AI-generated text. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/vinusankars/Reliability-of-AI-text-detectors .
Preprint.arXiv:2303.11156v2  [cs.CL]  28 Jun 2023
Contents
Abstract 1
1 Introduction 3
2 Evading AI-Detectors using Paraphrasing Attacks 6
2.1 Paraphrasing Attacks on Watermarked AI-generated Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2 Paraphrasing Attacks on Non-Watermarked AI-generated texts . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.3 Paraphrase Attacks on Retrieval-based Defenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3 Impossibility Results for Reliable Detection of AI-Generated Text 11
3.1 Paraphrasing to Evade Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2 Tightness Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3 Pseudorandomness in LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4 Estimating Total Variation between Human and AI Text Distributions 16
4.1 Estimating Total Variation for GPT-3 Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5 Spooﬁng Attacks on AI-text Generative Models 17
5.1 Spooﬁng Attacks on Watermarked Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.2 Spooﬁng Attacks on Retrieval-based Defenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3 Spooﬁng Attacks on Zero-Shot and Trained Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6 Discussion 20
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 21
References 23
2
Figure 1: An illustration of vulnerabilities of existing AI-text detectors. We consider both
watermarking-based [ 1] and non-watermarking-based detectors [ 2,3,4] and show that they are
not reliable in practical scenarios. Colored arrow paths show the potential pipelines for adversaries
to avoid detection. In red: an attacker can use a paraphraser to remove the LLM signatures from an
AI-generated text to avoid detection. We show that this attack can break a wide range of detectors,
including the ones with retrieval-based defense [ 4] that are built to be robust against paraphrasing.
We provide an impossibility result indicating that for a sufﬁciently good language model, even the
best-possible detector can perform only marginally better than a random classiﬁer. In blue: An
adversary can query the soft watermarked LLM multiple times to learn its watermarking scheme.
This information can be used to spoof the watermark detector by composing human text that is
detected to be watermarked. In §5, we show that all other detectors can also be easily spoofed to
make genuine human text detected as AI-generated.
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has made tremendous advances in recent years, from generative models
in computer vision [ 5,6] to large language models (LLMs) in natural language processing (NLP)
[7,8,9]. LLMs can now generate texts of supreme quality with the potential in many applications.
For example, the recent model of ChatGPT [ 10] can generate human-like texts for various tasks
such as writing codes for computer programs, lyrics for songs, completing documents, and question
answering; its applications are endless. The trend in NLP shows that these LLMs will even get
better with time. However, this comes with a signiﬁcant challenge in terms of authenticity and
regulations. AI tools have the potential to be misused by users for unethical purposes such as
plagiarism, generating fake news, spamming, generating fake product reviews, and manipulating web
content for social engineering in ways that can have negative impacts on society [ 11,12]. Some news
articles rewritten by AI have led to many fundamental errors in them [13]. Hence, there is a need to
ensure the responsible use of these generative AI tools. In order to aid this, a lot of recent research
focuses on detecting AI-generated texts.
Several detection works study this problem as a binary classiﬁcation problem [ 3,14,2,15,16]. For
example, OpenAI ﬁne-tunes RoBERTa-based [ 17] GPT-2 detector models to distinguish between
non-AI generated and GPT-2 generated texts [ 3]. This requires such a detector to be ﬁne-tuned with
supervision on each new LLM for reliable detection. These approaches that rely on a neural network
for their detection, can be vulnerable to adversarial and poisoning attacks [ 18,19,20,21]. Another
stream of work focuses on zero-shot AI text detection without any additional training overhead
[22,23,24]. These works evaluate the expected per-token log probability of texts and perform
thresholding to detect AI-generated texts. Mitchell et al. [2]observe that AI-generated passages
tend to lie in negative curvature of log probability of texts. They propose DetectGPT, a zero-shot
LLM text detection method, to leverage this observation. Another line of work aims to watermark
AI-generated texts to ease their detection [ 25,26,1,27]. Watermarking eases the detection of LLM
3
output text by imprinting speciﬁc patterns on them. Soft watermarking proposed in Kirchenbauer
et al. [1]partitions tokens into green and red lists to help create these patterns. A watermarked LLM
samples a token, with high probability, from the green list determined by its preﬁx token. These
watermarks are often imperceptible to humans. However, watermarking might not be a useful tool to
prevent LLM exploitation unless all the powerful LLMs are protected similarly. Krishna et al. [4]
introduces an information retrieval-based detector by storing the outputs of the LLM in a database.
For a candidate passage, their algorithm searches this database for semantically similar matches to
make their detection robust to paraphrasing. However, storing user-LLM conversations might lead to
serious privacy concerns.
In this paper, through empirical and theoretical analysis, we show that these state-of-the-art AI-text
detectors are unreliable in practical scenarios [ 28,29,30]. We study empirical attacks on soft
watermarking [ 1], and a wide range of zero-shot [ 2], retrieval-based [ 4], and neural network-based
detectors [3].
Paraphrasers: We show that a paraphrasing attack , where a lightweight neural network-based
paraphraser is applied to the output text of the AI-generative model, can evade various types of
detectors. Before highlighting the results, let us provide an intuition why this attack is successful. For
a given sentence s, supposeP(s)is the set of all paraphrased sentences that have similar meanings
to the sentence s. Moreover, let L(s)be the set of sentences the source LLM can output with
meanings similar to s. Suppose a user has generated susing an LLM and wants to evade detection.
IfjL(s)jjP(s)j, the user can randomly sample from P(s)and avoid detection (if the detection
model has a reasonably low false positive rate). Moreover, if jL(s)jis comparable tojP(s)j, the
detector cannot have low false positive and negative rates simultaneously.
With this intuition in mind, in §2, we use light-weight neural network-based paraphrasers ( 2:3and
5:5smaller than the source LLM in terms of the number of parameters) to rephrase the source
LLM’s output text. Our experiments show that this automated paraphrasing attack can drastically
reduce the accuracy of various detectors, including those using soft watermarking. For example, a
PEGASUS-based paraphraser [ 31] can drop the soft watermarking detector’s [ 1] accuracy from 97%
to80% with just a degradation of 3.5 in the perplexity score. The area under the receiver operating
characteristic (AUROC) curves of zero-shot detectors [ 2] drop from 96:5%to25:2%using a T5-based
paraphraser [ 32]. We also observe that the performance of neural network-based trained detectors
[3] deteriorate signiﬁcantly after our paraphrasing attack. For instance, the true positive rate of the
RoBERTa-Large-Detector from OpenAI drops from 100% to60% at a realistic low false positive
rate of 1%. In addition, we show that retrieval-based detector by Krishna et al. [4]designed to evade
paraphrase attacks are vulnerable to recursive paraphrasing. In fact, the accuracy of their detector falls
from 100% to25% with our recursive paraphrase attack. We also show that recursive paraphrasing
can further deteriorate the performance of watermarking-based [ 1] detectors (from 99% to15% true
positive rate at 1%false positive rate), zero-shot [2], and neural network-based detectors [3].
Impossibility of Detection: In §3, we present an impossibility result regarding the detection of
AI-generated texts. As language models advance, so does their ability to emulate human text. Indeed,
the problem of AI-text detection becomes more important and interesting in the presence of language
models that are designed to mimic humans and evade detection123[33]. With new advances in LLMs,
the distribution of AI-generated texts becomes increasingly similar to human-generated texts, making
them harder to detect. This similarity is reﬂected in the decreasing total variation distance between
the distributions of human and AI-generated text sequences. Adversaries, by seeking to mimic the
human-generated text distribution using AI models, implicitly reduce the total variation distance
between the two distributions to evade detection.
Theorem 1 shows that as the total variation between the two distributions decreases, the performance
of even the best possible detector deteriorates. It bounds the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUROC) of the best possible detector Das
AUROC (D)1
2+TV(M;H) TV(M;H)2
2
1Evasion tools: https://goldpenguin.org/blog/make-ai-writing-undetectable/
2Undetectable AI: https://undetectable.ai/
3StealthGPT: https://www.stealthgpt.ai/
4
where TV(M;H)is the total variation distance between model-generated text distribution Mand
human-generated text distribution H. It shows that as the total variation distance diminishes, the
best-possible detection performance approaches 1=2, which represents the AUROC corresponding to
a classiﬁer that randomly labels text as AI or human-generated.
Our impossibility result does notimply that detection performance will necessarily become as bad as
random, but that reliable detection may be unachievable. In most real-world scenarios, a detector is
considered good if it can achieve a high true positive rate, say 90%, while maintaining a low false
positive rate, say 1%. This is impossible to achieve when the two distributions overlap more than
11% (i.e., total variation <0:89). The aim of this analysis is to urge caution when dealing with
detection systems that purport to detect text produced by an AI model. Any such system needs to be
independently and rigorously evaluated for reliability and bias, ideally on language models designed
to evade detection, before deployment in the real world.
We complement our result with a tightness analysis, where we demonstrate that for a given human
distributionH, there exists a distribution Mand a detector Dfor which the above bound holds with
equality. In §4, we also present a method to empirically estimate the total variation distance and show
that it decreases with an increase in model size.
Generalizability: Although our analysis considers the text generated by all humans and general
language models, it can also be applied to speciﬁc scenarios, such as particular writing styles, clever
prompt engineering, or sentence paraphrasing, by deﬁning MandHappropriately. Our impossibility
result does notmake any assumptions on the nature of the distributions, such as Hbeing a monolithic
distribution shared by all humans, as claimed by Kirchenbauer et al. [34] in more recent work. The
same result can be derived using Hto represent the text distribution produced by an individual human
(e.g. Donald Trump or Barack Obama, to borrow the example used in [ 34]) andMto represent the
output distribution of an AI seeking to mimic the individual’s writing style. Mcould also represent
the text distribution of a general-purpose language model like GPT-4 when prompted in a speciﬁc
manner, e.g., ‘Write a speech in the style of ...’, to induce a certain writing style. HandMcould
also represent a collection of human distributions and a collection of model distributions (mimicking
the human distributions) combined together using appropriate weights based on context.
In Section 3.3, we extend our impossibility result to include the case where pseudorandom number
generators are used in LLMs (e.g., sampling tokens) instead of true randomness. This pseudoran-
domness could make the AI-generated text distribution very different from the human-generated text
distribution [ 34]. This is because the pseudorandom AI-generated distribution is a collection of Dirac
delta function distributions and a human is exorbitantly unlikely to produce a sample corresponding to
any of the delta functions. This means that the total variation between the human and pseudorandom
AI-generated distributions is almost one, implying that an almost perfect detector could exist in
theory. However, the existence of such a detector does not imply that it could be computed efﬁciently.
We show that, for a computationally bounded detector, the bound in Theorem 1 could be modiﬁed
with a small correction term to account for the presence of pseudorandomness. Formally, for a
polynomial-time computable detector D, we prove the following bound on its performance:
AUROC (D)1
2+TV(M;H) TV(M;H)2
2+;
whereis a negligible function 1=btof the number of bits bused in the seed of the pseudorandom
generator for a positive integer t.
Our impossibility result could also be used to show that AI-generated text, even with an embedded
watermark, can be made difﬁcult to detect by simply passing it through a paraphrasing tool. For a
sequencesgenerated by a language model, we set MandHto be the distributions of sequences
of similar meaning to sproduced by the paraphraser and humans. The goal of the paraphraser is to
make its output distribution similar to the distribution of human-generated sequences with respect to
the total variation distance. The above result puts a constraint on the performance of the detector on
the rephrased AI text.
Spooﬁng Attacks: Finally, we discuss the possibility of spooﬁng attacks on text generative models
in §5. In this setting, an attacker generates a non-AI text that is detected to be AI-generated. An
adversary can potentially launch spooﬁng attacks to produce derogatory texts that are detected to
be AI-generated to affect the reputation of the target LLM’s developers. Though the random seed
used for generating watermarked text is private [ 1], we develop an attack that smartly queries the
5
Text # tokens # green tokens Detector accuracy Perplexity
Watermarked LLM output 19042 11078 97% 6.7
PEGASUS-based paraphrasing 16773 7412 80% 10.2
T5-based paraphrasing 15164 6493 64% 16.7
T5-based paraphrasing 14913 6107 57% 18.7
Table 1: Results of paraphrasing attacks on soft watermarking [ 1]. For testing, we consider 100
text passages from XSum [ 35]. The watermarked output text from the target AI model consists of
58% green list tokens. The PEGASUS-based [ 31] paraphrased text consists of only 44% green
list tokens. Hence, the detector accuracy drops from 97% to80%, making it unreliable. Note that
these PEGASUS-based paraphraser texts only degrade the perplexity measure by 3.5. Even a lighter
T5-based paraphraser can affect the detector accuracy without degrading the text quality signiﬁcantly.
target LLM multiple times to learn its watermarking scheme. An adversarial human can then use this
information to compose texts that are detected to be watermarked. Retrieval-based detectors [ 4] can
also be easily spoofed by registering paraphrased versions of human essays in their database. An
adversarial human with the knowledge of another person’s essay could prompt an LLM to paraphrase
it. The output of the LLM (paraphrased version of the human essay) would be stored in its database.
The original human essay will now be detected as AI-generated since retrieval-based detectors can be
robust to simple paraphrasing (while they are not robust to recursive paraphrasing). For zero-shot and
neural network-based detectors, we ﬁnd that a naïve attack where different human texts are combined
leads to them being classiﬁed as AI-generated text. Figure 1 illustrates vulnerabilities of existing
AI-text detectors.
Identifying AI-generated text is a critical problem to avoid its misuse by users for unethical purposes
such as plagiarism, generating fake news and spamming. However, deploying unreliable detectors is
notthe right solution to tackle this issue as a detector with a high false positive rate will cause more
harm than good in society. Our results highlight the sensitivities of a wide range of detectors to simple
practical attacks such as paraphrasing attacks. More importantly, our results indicate the impossibility
of developing reliable detectors in practical scenarios — to maintain reliable detection performance,
LLMs would have to trade off their performance. We hope that these ﬁndings can initiate an honest
dialogue within the community concerning the ethical and dependable utilization of AI-generated text.
2 Evading AI-Detectors using Paraphrasing Attacks
Detecting AI-generated text is crucial for ensuring the security of an LLM and avoiding type-II errors
(not detecting LLM output as AI-generated text). To protect an LLM’s ownership, a dependable
detector should be able to detect AI-generated texts with high accuracy. In this section, we discuss
paraphrasing attacks that can degrade type-II errors of state-of-the-art AI text detectors such as
soft watermarking [ 1], zero-shot detectors [ 2], trained neural network-based detectors [ 3], and
retrieval-based detectors [ 4]. These detectors identify if a given text contains distinct LLM signatures,
indicating that it may be AI-generated. The idea here is that a paraphraser can potentially remove
these signatures without affecting the meaning of the text. While we discuss this attack theoretically
in §3, the main intuition here is as follows:
Letsrepresent a sentence and Srepresent a set of all meaningful sentences to humans. Suppose a
functionP:S! 2Sexists such that8s02P(s), the meaning of sands0are the same with respect
to humans. In other words, P(s)is the set of sentences with a similar meaning to the sentence s.
LetL:S! 2Ssuch thatL(s)is the set of sentences the source LLM can output with the same
meaning ass. Further, the sentences in L(s)are detected to be AI-generated by a reliable detector,
andL(s)P(S)so that the output of the AI model makes sense to humans. If jL(s)jis comparable
tojP(s)j, the detector might label many human-written texts as AI-generated (high type-I error).
However, ifjL(s)jis small, we can randomly choose a sentence from P(s)to evade the detector with
a high probability (affecting type-II error). Thus, in this context of paraphrasing attacks, detectors
face a trade-off between minimizing type-I and type-II errors. We use T5-based and PEGASUS-based
paraphrasers for sentence-by-sentence paraphrasing. Suppose an AI-text passage S= (s1;s2;:::;sn)
6
Description Text
Input prompt
(misinformationy)Drinking bleach is the best way to tackle COVID-19. WHO announced that
vaccination for COVID-19 is ineffective. CDC is urging the citizens to drink
bleach everyday. The health department has ofﬁcially conﬁrmed that
Detected
watermarked textthe vaccine is useless. The World Health Organization made shocking
statement, that the vaccine is ineffective, because it does not prevent people
from getting infected, which means it is useless. CDC is also calling for
people to drink bleach daily to cleanse the body. [continues...]
Undetected
PEGASUS-based
paraphrasingThe vaccine is useless. The vaccine is useless because it doesn’t prevent
people from getting infections, according to the World Health Organization.
The CDC wants people to drink bleach to cleanse their body. The vaccine
is useless according to WHO. The CDC wants people to drink bleach to
cleanse their body. [continues...]
Input prompt
(fake newsy)Latest news: There is no more daylight savings. The Government has
passed a bill to scrape off daylight savings from 2023 onwards, said a US
government ofﬁcial.
Detected
watermarked text\n\nThe bill was introduced in the US Senate on Wednesday, and the US
House of Representatives got a vote on it on Thursday afternoon. The US
President Donald Trump is expected to sign it. [continues...]
Undetected
PEGASUS-based
paraphrasingThe US House of Representatives voted on the bill on Thursday afternoon,
after it was introduced in the US Senate on Wednesday. It is expected that
Donald Trump will sign it. It will become law if he gets it. [continues...]
Table 2: PEGASUS-based paraphrasing for evading soft watermarking-based detectors. The target
AI generator outputs a watermarked text for an input prompt. This output is detected to be generated
by the watermarked target LLM. We use a PEGASUS-based [ 31] paraphraser to rephrase this
watermarked output from the target LLM. The paraphraser rephrases sentence by sentence. The
detector does not detect the output text from the paraphraser. However, the paraphrased passage reads
well and means the same as the original watermarked LLM output. At the top rows, we demonstrate
how an input prompt can prompt a target LLM to generate watermarked misinformation. In the
bottom rows, we showcase how an input prompt can induce a target LLM to create watermarked fake
news. Using paraphrasing attacks in this manner, an attacker can spread fake news or misinformation
without getting detected.
ycontains misinformation only to demonstrate that LLMs can be used for malicious purposes.
andfis a paraphraser. The paraphrase attack modiﬁes Sto get (f(s1);f(s2);:::;f (sn)). This output
should be ideally classiﬁed as AI-generated. The 11B parameter DIPPER paraphraser proposed in
Krishna et al. [4]is powerful and it can paraphrase Sto getf(S)in one-shot. Here, the output of
f(S)could also be conditioned by an input prompt. We use DIPPER for recursive paraphrase attacks.
Forirounds of paraphrasing of S(represented as ppi), we use DIPPER frecursively on Sitimes.
That is, for generation ppi, we applyfonpp(i-1) . We also condition DIPPER with a prompt
pp(i-2) to encourage the paraphrasing to improve its quality.
2.1 Paraphrasing Attacks on Watermarked AI-generated Text
Here, we perform our experiments on the soft watermarking scheme proposed in [ 1]. In this scheme,
an output token of the LLM is selected from a green list determined by its preﬁx. We expect
paraphrasing to remove the watermark signature from the target LLM’s output. The target AI text
generator uses a transformer-based OPT-1.3B [ 8] architecture with 1.3B parameters. We use a T5-
based [ 9] paraphrasing model [ 32] with 222M parameters and a PEGASUS-based [ 31] paraphrasing
model with 568M parameters4(2:3and5:8smaller than the target LLM, respectively). The target
LLM is trained to perform text completion tasks on extensive data, while the smaller paraphrasing
models are ﬁne-tuned only for paraphrasing tasks. For these reasons, the paraphrasing model we use
for our attack is lighter than the target OPT-based model.
4https://huggingface.co/tuner007/pegasus_paraphrase
7
Figure 2: Accuracy of the soft watermarking
detector on paraphrased LLM outputs plotted
against perplexity. The lower the perplexity
is, the better the quality of the text is.
Figure 3: ROC curves for the watermark-based de-
tector. The performance of such a strong detection
model can deteriorate with recursive paraphrasing
attacks. ppirefers to irecursive paraphrasing.
Figure 4: ROC curves for various trained and zero-shot detectors. Left: Without attack. Middle:
After paraphrasing attack. The performance of zero-shot detectors drops signiﬁcantly. Right: Here,
we assume we can query the detector eight times for the paraphrasing attack. We generate ten
paraphrasings for each passage and query multiple times to evade detection. Notice how all detectors
have low true positives at 1%false positives. In the plot legend – perturbation refers to the
zero-shot methods in [ 2];threshold refers to the zero-shot methods in [ 22,24,23];roberta refers
to OpeanAI’s trained detectors [3]. AUROC scores for each plot are given in parentheses.
The paraphraser takes the watermarked LLM text sentence by sentence as input. We use 100 passages
from the Extreme Summarization (XSum) dataset [ 35] for our evaluations. The passages from this
dataset are input to the target AI model to generate watermarked text. Using the PEGASUS-based
paraphraser, the detector’s accuracy drops from 97% to80% with only a trade-off of 3.5 in perplexity
score (see Table 1). This paraphrasing strategy reduces the percentage of green list tokens in the
watermarked text from 58% (before paraphrasing) to 44% (after paraphrasing). Table 2 shows an
example output from the target soft watermarked LLM before and after paraphrasing. We also use a
much smaller T5-based paraphraser [ 32] to show that even such a naïve paraphraser can drop the
detector’s accuracy from 97% to57%. Figure 2 shows the trade-off between the detection accuracy
and the T5-based paraphraser’s output text quality (measured using perplexity score). However, we
note that perplexity is a proxy metric for evaluating the quality of texts since it depends on another
LLM for computing the score. We use a larger OPT-2.7B [ 8] with 2.7B parameters for computing
the perplexity scores. Figure 3 shows the performance of the watermarking model with recursive
paraphrase attack using DIPPER [ 4]. DIPPER can efﬁciently paraphrase passages in context. That is,
DIPPER modiﬁes Stof(S)wherefis the DIPPER paraphraser. ppirefers to the i-th recursion
of paraphrasing. For example, pp3forSusingfgivesf(f(f(S))). We use 100 human-written
passages from XSum and 100 watermarked XSum passage completions to evaluate the ROC curve.
We observe that the true positive rate of the watermarking model at a 1%false positive rate
degrades from 99%(no attack) to 15%(pp5) after ﬁve rounds of recursive paraphrasing. The
AUROC of the detector drops from 99:8%to67:9%. Table 3 shows an example of a recursively
paraphrased passage.
8
Figure 5: ROC curves illustrating the detection of recursively paraphrased text. Left: Three rounds of
recursive paraphrasing with three queries to the detector. Right: Five rounds of recursive paraphrasing
with ﬁve queries to the detector.
Description Text
InputPrison Link Cymru had 1,099 referrals in 2015-16 and said some ex-offenders
were living rough for up to a year before ﬁnding suitable accommoda-
tion.\nWorkers at the charity claim investment in housing would be cheaper
than jailing homeless repeat offenders.\nThe Welsh Government [continues...]
pp1In the year 2014-2015, Prison Link Cymru made 1,099 referrals, and said some
offenders waited up to a year before ﬁnding suitable accommodation. Staff from
the charitable organization say that the investment in housing would be cheaper
than having to re-lock homeless offenders. The Welsh government [continues...]
pp2In 2015-16, Prison Link Cymru had 1,099 referrals and said some offenders were
living rough for up to a year before ﬁnding suitable accommodation. Workers
at the charity claim investment in housing would be cheaper than locking up
homeless repeat offenders. The Welsh Government [continues...]
pp3In fact, it was one of the main reasons why they came back to prison. In the year
2015-16, Prison Link Cymru made 1,099 referrals and said that offenders had
lived for up to a year before ﬁnding suitable accommodation. The workers at the
charitable organization say that the investment in housing would be cheaper than
re-locking homeless offenders. The government of Wales [continues...]
pp4In the year to the end of March, Prison Link Cymru had 1,099 referrals and
said offenders had been living rough for up to a year before ﬁnding suitable
accommodation. Workers at the charity say investment in housing would be
cheaper than re-imprisoning homeless repeat offenders. The Welsh Government
[continues...]
pp5The government of Wales says that more people than ever before are being helped
to deal with their housing problems. In the year 2015-16, Prison Link Cymru
referred 1,099 people and said that homeless people had lived up to a year before
ﬁnding suitable accommodation. The workers at the charitable organization say
that the investment in housing would be cheaper than imprisoning homeless
offenders again. Prison Link Cymru [continues...]
Table 3: Example of a recursively paraphrased passage from the XSum dataset. The paraphrasing is
performed using DIPPER [4]. ppirefers to the output after irounds of recursive paraphrasing.
2.2 Paraphrasing Attacks on Non-Watermarked AI-generated texts
Non-watermarking detectors such as trained classiﬁers [ 3], retrieval-based detectors [ 4], and zero-shot
classiﬁers [ 2,24,23,22] use the presence of LLM-speciﬁc signatures in AI-generated texts for their
detection. Neural network-based trained detectors such as RoBERTa-Large-Detector from OpenAI
[3] are trained or ﬁne-tuned for binary classiﬁcation with datasets containing human and AI-generated
texts. Zero-shot classiﬁers leverage speciﬁc statistical properties of the source LLM outputs for
their detection. Retrieval-based methods search for a candidate passage in a database that stores the
LLM outputs. Here, we perform experiments on these non-watermarking detectors to show they are
vulnerable to our paraphrasing attack.
9
Description z-score Text
Input prompty– Morocco won the 2022 soccer world cup because
Detected GPT text 1:47Morocco won the 2022 soccer world cup because they are the best. Be-
cause they had their own style of soccer, the whole world has adopted the
idea. Not to forget the other reason why we came to this tournament. We
all know there will be some serious bad blood if the host are eliminated
from the ﬁnal and not given any chance to play their best. In the past,
host nations have had to host the tournament with a different format rather
than the original one, where the highest ranked team went, regardless of
gender, to the quarter ﬁnals.
Undetected
T5-based
paraphrasing0:80morocco won the 2022 world cup because they are the best. because of
their own style of soccer the whole world followed this idea. Not to forget
the other reason why we came to this tournament. we all know if the host
is eliminated from the ﬁnal and given no chance to play their best there
will be much bloodshed. In the past, host nations have had to host the
tournament with a different format rather than the original one, where the
highest ranked team went, regardless of gender, to the quarter ﬁnals.
Table 4: Evading DetectGPT using a T5-based paraphraser. DetectGPT classiﬁes a text to be
generated by GPT-2 if the z-score is greater than 1. After paraphrasing, the z-score drops below the
threshold, and the text is not detected as AI-generated.
ycontains misinformation only to demonstrate that LLMs can be used for malicious purposes.
Figure 6: Recursive paraphrasing breaks the retrieval-based
detector [ 4] without degrading text quality. ppi refers to
irecursion(s) of paraphrasing. Numbers next to markers
denote the perplexity scores of the paraphraser output.We use a pre-trained GPT-2 Medium
model [ 36] with 355M parameters to
evaluate our attack on 200 passages
from the XSum dataset [ 35]. We use
a T5-based paraphrasing model [ 32]
with 222M parameters to rephrase the
output texts from the target GPT-2
Medium model. Figure 4 shows the ef-
fectiveness of the paraphrasing attack
over these detectors. The AUROC
scores of DetectGPT [ 2] drop from
96:5%(before the attack) to 59:8%
(after the attack). Note that AUROC
of50% corresponds to a random de-
tector. The rest of the zero-shot detec-
tors [ 22,24,23] also perform poorly
after our attack. Though the perfor-
mance of the trained neural network-
based detectors [ 3] is better than that
of zero-shot detectors, they are also not reliable. For example, the true positive rate of OpenAI’s
RoBERTa-Large-Detector drops from 100% to around 80% after our attack at a practical false positive
rate of 1%. With multiple queries to the detector, an adversary can paraphrase more efﬁciently to
bring down the true positive rate of the RoBERTa-Large-Detector to 60%. Table 4 shows an example
of outputs from the GPT-2 model before and after paraphrasing. The output of the paraphraser reads
well and means the same as the detected GPT-2 text. We measure the perplexities of the GPT-2 output
text before the attack, after the paraphrase attack, and after multiple query paraphrase attack to be
16.3, 27.2, and 18.3, respectively.
We also examine the effectiveness of recursive paraphrasing on these detectors. Here we use the
DIPPER paraphraser itimes recursively ( ppi) to generate iparaphrases of the GPT-2 generated
text. We select the paraphrased text with the worst detection score out of the iparaphrased versions
assuming black-box access to the detector. We present the ROC curves in Figure 5. We observe
a substantial decline in the AUROC values for all the detectors, highlighting the fragility of these
detection methods with recursive paraphrasing. For instance, the AUROC curve values drops from
82%to18%for DetectGPT [2] after attack .
10
2.3 Paraphrase Attacks on Retrieval-based Defenses
The retrieval-based detector in Krishna et al. [4]is designed to be robust against paraphrase attacks.
They propose to maintain a database that stores the users’ conversations with the LLM. For a
candidate passage, their detector relies on retrieving semantically-similar passages from this database.
If the similarity is larger than a ﬁxed threshold, the candidate passage is classiﬁed as AI-generated.
They empirically show that their defense is robust to paraphrase attacks using their heavy-duty 11B
parameter paraphraser, DIPPER, compared to other text detectors.
However, we show that they can suffer from recursive paraphrase attacks. We use their codes5, and
DIPPER [ 4] for our experiments. We use 100 passages from the XSum dataset labeled as AI outputs
and store them in the detector’s database. As shown in Figure 6, this detector detects all the AI outputs
after a round of simple paraphrasing. However, the detection accuracy drops signiﬁcantly to 25%
after ﬁve rounds of recursive paraphrasing. This shows that recursive paraphrasing can evade
their semantic matching algorithm that aids in retrieval. Using a heavy-duty paraphraser DIPPER
helps preserve the perplexity scores as shown in Figure 6. Moreover, retrieval is impractical since
this leads to serious privacy concerns from storing users’ LLM conversations.
3 Impossibility Results for Reliable Detection of AI-Generated Text
Detecting the misuse of language models in the real world, such as plagiarism and mass propaganda,
necessitates the identiﬁcation of text produced by all kinds of language models, including those
without watermarks. However, as these models improve over time, so does our ability to emulate
human text with AI-generated text. The problem of AI-text detection becomes more important and
interesting in the presence of language models designed to mimic humans and evade detection. The
generated text looks increasingly similar to human text and the statistical difference between the
corresponding distributions decreases, which complicates the detection process. More formally, the
total variation distance between the distributions of AI-generated and human-generated text sequences
diminishes as language models become more sophisticated (see § 4).
This section presents a fundamental constraint on general AI-text detection, demonstrating that the
performance of even the best possible detector decreases as models get bigger and more powerful.
Even with a moderate overlap between the two distributions, detection performance may not be
sufﬁciently good for real-world deployment and may result in a high false positive rate. The purpose
of this analysis is to caution against relying too heavily on detectors that claim to identify AI-generated
text. Detectors should be independently and rigorously evaluated for reliability, ideally on language
models designed to evade detection, before deployment in the real world.
Figure 7: Comparing the performance, in terms of area
under the ROC curve, of the best-possible detector to
that of the baseline performance corresponding to a
random classiﬁer.In the following theorem, we formalize
the above statement by showing an upper
bound on the area under the ROC curve
of an arbitrary detector in terms of the to-
tal variation distance between the distri-
butions for AI and human-generated text.
This bound indicates that as the distance
between these distributions diminishes, the
AUROC bound approaches 1=2, which
represents the baseline performance cor-
responding to a detector that randomly la-
bels text as AI or human-generated. We
deﬁneMandHas the text distributions
produced by AI and humans, respectively,
over the set of all possible text sequences

. We use TV(M;H)to denote the total
variation distance between these two distri-
butions and model a detector as a function
D: 
!Rthat maps every sequence in 
to a real number. Sequences are classiﬁed into AI and human-generated by applying a threshold 
5https://github.com/martiansideofthemoon/ai-detection-paraphrases
11
on this number. By adjusting the parameter , we can tune the sensitivity of the detector to AI and
human-generated texts to obtain a ROC curve.
Theorem 1. The area under the ROC of any detector Dis bounded as
AUROC (D)1
2+TV(M;H) TV(M;H)2
2:
Proof. The ROC is a plot between the true positive rate (TPR) and the false positive rate (FPR) which
are deﬁned as follows:
TPR=PsM[D(s)]
andFPR=PsH[D(s)];
whereis some classiﬁer parameter. We can bound the difference between the TPRand the FPR
by the total variation between MandH:
jTPR FPRj=jPsM[D(s)] PsH[D(s)]jTV(M;H) (1)
TPRFPR+TV(M;H): (2)
Since the TPRis also bounded by 1 we have:
TPRmin(FPR+TV(M;H);1): (3)
Denoting FPR,TPR, and TV(M;H)withx,y, andtvfor brevity, we bound the AUROC as
follows:
AUROC (D) =Z1
0ydxZ1
0min(x+tv;1)dx
=Z1 tv
0(x+tv)dx+Z1
1 tvdx
=x2
2+tvx1 tv
0+jxj1
1 tv
=(1 tv)2
2+tv(1 tv) +tv
=1
2+tv2
2 tv+tv tv2+tv
=1
2+tv tv2
2:
Figure 7 shows how the above bound grows as a function of the total variation. For a detector to have
a good performance (say, AUROC 0:9), the distributions of human and AI-generated texts must
be very different from each other (total variation >0:5). As the two distributions become similar
(say, total variation 0:2), the performance of even the best-possible detector is not good (AUROC
<0:7). This shows that distinguishing the text produced by a non-watermarked language model from
a human-generated one is a fundamentally difﬁcult task. Note that, for a watermarked model, the
above bound can be close to one as the total variation distance between the watermarked distribution
and human-generated distribution can be high. In what follows, we discuss how paraphrasing attacks
can be effective in such cases.
3.1 Paraphrasing to Evade Detection
Although our analysis considers the text generated by all humans and general language models, it can
also be applied to speciﬁc scenarios, such as particular writing styles or sentence paraphrasing, by
deﬁningMandHappropriately. For example, it could be used to show that AI-generated text, even
with watermarks, can be made difﬁcult to detect by simply passing it through a paraphrasing tool.
Consider a paraphraser that takes a sequence sgenerated by an AI model as input and produces a
12
human-like sequence with similar meaning. Set M=RM(s)andH=RH(s)to be the distribution
of sequences with similar meanings to sproduced by the paraphraser and humans, respectively. The
goal of the paraphraser is to make its distribution RM(s)as similar to the human distribution RH(s)
as possible, essentially reducing the total variation distance between them. Theorem 1 puts the
following bound on the performance of a detector Dthat seeks to detect the outputs of the paraphraser
from the sequences produced by humans.
Corollary 1. The area under the ROC of the detector Dis bounded as
AUROC (D)1
2+TV(RM(s);RH(s)) TV(RM(s);RH(s))2
2:
General Trade-offs between True Positive and False Positive Rates. Another way to understand
the limitations of AI-generated text detectors is directly through the characterization of the trade-offs
between true positive rates and false positive rates. Adapting inequality 2, we have the following
corollaries:
Corollary 2. For any watermarking scheme W,
Pr
swRM(s)[swis watermarked using W] Pr
swRH(s)[swis watermarked using W]
+TV(RM(s);RH(s));
whereRM(s)andRH(s)are the distributions of rephrased sequences for sproduced by the
paraphrasing model and humans, respectively.
Humans may have different writing styles. Corollary 2 indicates that if a rephrasing model resembles
certain human text distribution H(i.e.TV(RM(s);RH(s))is small), then either certain people’s writ-
ing will be detected falsely as watermarked (i.e. PrswRH(s)[swis watermarked using W]is high)
or the paraphrasing model can remove the watermark (i.e. PrswRM(s)[swis watermarked using W]
is low).
Corollary 3. For any AI-text detector D,
Pr
sM[sis detected as AI-text by D]Pr
sH[sis detected as AI-text by D] +TV(M;H);
whereMandHdenote text distributions by the model and by humans, respectively.
Corollary 3 indicates that if a model resembles certain human text distribution H(i.e.TV(M;H)
is small), then either certain people’s writing will be detected falsely as AI-generated (i.e.
PrsH[sis detected as AI-text by D]is high) or the AI-generated text will not be detected reliably
(i.e.PrsM[sis detected as AI-text by D]is low).
These results demonstrate fundamental limitations for AI-text detectors, with and without
watermarking schemes. In Appendix 3.2, we present a tightness analysis of the bound in Theorem 1,
where we show that for any human distribution Hthere exists an AI distribution and a detector D
for which the bound holds with equality.
3.2 Tightness Analysis
In this section, we show that the bound in Theorem 1 is tight. This bound need not be tight for any
two distributionsHandM, e.g., two identical normal distributions in one dimension shifted by a
distance. However, tightness can be shown for every human distribution H. For a given distribution
of human-generated text sequences H, we construct an AI-text distribution Mand a detector Dsuch
that the bound holds with equality.
Deﬁne sublevel sets of the probability density function of the distribution of human-generated text
pdfHover the set of all sequences 
as follows:

H(c) =fs2
jpdfH(s)cg
wherec2R. Assume that, 
H(0)is not empty. Now, consider a distribution M, with density
function pdfM, which has the following properties:
1.The probability of a sequence drawn from Mfalling in 
H(0)isTV(M;H), i.e.,
PsM[s2
H(0)] = TV(M;H).
13
2.pdfM(s) =pdfH(s)for alls2
() 
(0) where >0such that PsH[s2
()] =
1 TV(M;H).
3.pdfM(s) = 0 for alls2
 
().
Deﬁne a hypothetical detector Dthat maps each sequence in 
to the negative of the probability
density function of H, i.e.,D(s) = pdfH(s). Using the deﬁnitions of TPRandFPR, we have:
TPR=PsM[D(s)]
=PsM[ pdfH(s)]
=PsM[pdfH(s) ]
=PsM[s2
H( )]
Similarly,
FPR=PsH[s2
H( )]:
For2[ ;0],
TPR=PsM[s2
H( )]
=PsM[s2
H(0)] + PsM[s2
H( ) 
H(0)]
=TV(M;H) +PsM[s2
H( ) 
H(0)] (using property 1)
=TV(M;H) +PsH[s2
H( ) 
H(0)] (using property 2)
=TV(M;H) +PsH[s2
H( )] PsH[s2
H(0)] (
H(0)
H( ))
=TV(M;H) +FPR: (PsH[s2
H(0)] = 0 )
For2[ 1; ],TPR= 1, by property 3. Also, as goes from 0to 1,FPRgoes from 0to
1. Therefore, TPR= min( FPR+TV(M;H);1)which is similar to Equation 3. Calculating the
AUROC in a similar fashion as in the previous section, we get the following:
AUROC (D) =1
2+TV(M;H) TV(M;H)2
2:
3.3 Pseudorandomness in LLMs
Most machine learning models, including large language models (LLMs), use pseudorandom number
generators in one form or another to produce their outputs. For example, an LLM may use a
pseudorandom number generator to sample the next token in the output sequence. In discussing our
impossibility result, Kirchenbauer et al. [34] in a more recent work argue that this pseudorandomness
makes the AI-generated text distribution very different from the human-generated text distribution.
This is because the pseudorandom AI-generated distribution is a collection of Dirac delta function
distributions and a human is exorbitantly unlikely to produce a sample corresponding to any of
the delta functions. In our framework, this means that the total variation between the human and
pseudorandom AI-generated distributions is almost one, making the bound in Theorem 1 vacuous.
We argue that, although the true total variation between the human and pseudorandom AI-generated
distributions is high and there exists (in theory) a detector function that can separate the distributions
almost perfectly, this function may not be efﬁciently computable. Any polynomial-time computable
detector can only achieve a negligible advantage from the use of pseudorandomness instead of true
randomness. If we had knowledge of the seed used for the pseudorandom number generator, we would
be able to predict the pseudorandom samples. However, an individual seeking to evade detection
could simply randomize this seed making it computationally infeasible to predict the samples.
We modify the bound in Theorem 1 to include a negligible correction term to account for the use of
pseudorandomness. We prove that the performance of a polynomial-time computable detector Don
a pseudorandom version of the AI-generated distribution cMis bounded by the total variation for the
truly random distribution M(resulting from the LLM using true randomness) as follows:
AUROC (D)1
2+TV(M;H) TV(M;H)2
2+:
The termrepresents the gap between the probabilities assigned by MandcMto any polynomial-time
computablef0;1g-functionf, i.e.,
Ps2M[f(s) = 1] Ps2cM[f(s) = 1]: (4)
14
This term is orders of magnitude smaller than any of the terms in the bound and can be safely ignored.
For example, commonly used pseudorandom generators6can achieve an that is bounded by a
negligible function 1=btof the number of bits bused in the seed of the generator for a positive integer
t7[37,38]. From a computational point of view, the total variation for the pseudorandom distribution
is almost the same as the truly random AI-generated distribution. Thus, our framework provides a
reasonable approximation for real-world LLMs and the impossibility result holds even in the presence
of pseudorandomness.
Computational Total Variation Distance: Just as the total variation distance TVbetween two
probability distributions is deﬁned as the difference in probabilities assigned by the two distributions
to anyf0;1g-function, we deﬁne a computational version of this distance TVcfor polynomial-time
computable functions:
TVc(A;B) = max
f2PPsA[f(s) = 1] PsB[f(s) = 1];
wherePrepresents the set of polynomial-time computable f0;1g-functions.Pcould also be deﬁned
as the set of all polynomial-size circuits which could be more appropriate for deep neural network-
based detectors. The function fcould be thought of as the indicator function for the detection
parameter being above a certain threshold, i.e., D(s)as in the proof of Theorem 1. The
following lemma holds for the performance of a polynomial-time detector D:
Lemma 1. The area under the ROC of any polynomial-time computable detector Dis bounded as
AUROC (D)1
2+TVc(cM;H) TVc(cM;H)2
2:
This lemma can be proved in the same way as Theorem 1 by replacing the truly random AI-
generated distribution Mwith its pseudorandom version cMand the true total variation TVwith its
computaional variant TVc.
Next, we relate the computational total variation TVcbetweenHand the pseudorandom distribution
cMwith the total variation TVbetweenHand the truly random distribution M.
Lemma 2. For human distribution H, truly random AI-generated distribution Mand its pseudoran-
dom versioncM,
TVc(cM;H)TV(M;H) +:
Proof.
TVc(cM;H) = max
f2PPsH[f(s) = 1] PscM[f(s) = 1] (from deﬁnition of TVc)
= max
f2PPsH[f(s) = 1] PsM[f(s) = 1]
+PsM[f(s) = 1] PscM[f(s) = 1] (+/-ing PsM[f(s) = 1] )
max
f2PPsH[f(s) = 1] PsM[f(s) = 1]
+PsM[f(s) = 1] PscM[f(s) = 1] (usingja+bjjaj+jbj)
TV(M;H) +: (from deﬁnition of TVand bound 4)
This shows that although the true total variation may be high due to pseudorandomness, the effective
total variation is still low. We now use this to prove the modiﬁed version of our impossibility result.
Theorem 2 (Computational Impossibility Result ).The AUROC of any polynomial-time com-
putable detector DforHand the pseudorandom distribution cMis bounded using the TVfor the
truly random distribution Mas
AUROC (D)1
2+TV(M;H) TV(M;H)2
2+:
6Cryptographic PRNGs: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_number_generator
7Negligible function: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negligible_function
15
Proof.
AUROC (D)1
2+TVc(cM;H) TVc(cM;H)2
2(from Lemma 1)
1
2+TV(M;H) + (TV(M;H) +)2
2
(from Lemma 2 and since1
2+x x2
2is increasing in [0;1])
=1
2+TV(M;H) + TV(M;H)2+2+ 2TV(M;H)
2
1
2+TV(M;H) TV(M;H)2
2+: (dropping negative terms containing )
4 Estimating Total Variation between Human and AI Text Distributions
We estimate the total variation (TV) between human text distribution (WebText) and the output
distribution of several models from OpenAI’s GPT-2 series.8For two distributions HandM, the
total variation between them is deﬁned as the maximum difference between the probabilities assigned
by them to any event Eover the sample space 
, i.e.,
TV(H;M) = max
EPsH[s2E] PsM[s2E]:
Thus, for any event E, this difference in probabilities is a valid lower bound on the total variation
between the two distributions. Since we do not know the probability density functions for Hand
M, solving the above maximization problem over the entire event space is intractable. Thus, we
approximate the event space as a class of events deﬁned by a neural network with parameters that
maps a text sequence in 
to a real number. The corresponding event Eis said to occur when the
output of the neural network is above a threshold . We seek to ﬁnd an event Ewhich obtains as
tight a lower bound on the total variation as possible.
Figure 8: TV between WebText and outputs of
GPT-2 models (small, medium, large, and XL) for
varying sequence lengths.Estimation Procedure: We train a RoBERTa
large classiﬁer [ 17] on samples from human and
AI text distributions. Given a text sequence,
this classiﬁer produces a score between 0 and
1 that represents how likely the model thinks
the sequence is AI-generated. Assuming the AI
text distribution as the positive class, we pick a
threshold for this score that maximizes the dif-
ference between the true positive rate (TPR) and
the false positive rate (FPR) using samples from
a validation set. Finally, we estimate the total
variation as the difference between the TPR and
the FPR on a test set. This difference is essen-
tially the gap between the probabilities assigned
by the human and AI-generated text distribu-
tions to the above classiﬁer for the computed
threshold, which is a lower bound on the total
variation.
Figure 8 plots the total variation estimates for four GPT-2 models (small, medium, large, and XL)
for four different text sequence lengths (25, 50, 75, and 100) estimated using a RoBERTa-large
architecture. We train a separate instance of this architecture for each GPT-2 model and sequence
length to estimate the total variation for the corresponding distribution. We observe that, as models
become larger and more sophisticated, the TV estimates between human and AI-text distributions
decrease. This indicates that as language models become more powerful, the statistical difference
between their output distribution and human-generated text distribution vanishes.
8https://github.com/openai/gpt-2-output-dataset
16
(a) WebText
 (b) ArXiv
Figure 9: Total variation estimates for GPT-3 models with respect to WebText and ArXiv datasets
using different sequence lengths from the model completions.
4.1 Estimating Total Variation for GPT-3 Models
We repeat the above experiments with GPT-3 series models, namely Ada, Babbage, and Curie, as
documented on the OpenAI platform.9We use WebText and ArXiv abstracts [ 39] datasets as human
text distributions. From the above three models, Ada is the least powerful in terms of text generation
capabilities and Curie is the most powerful. Since there are no freely available datasets for the outputs
of these models, we use the API service from OpenAI to generate the required datasets.
We split each human text sequence from WebText into ‘prompt’ and ‘completion’, where the prompt
contains the ﬁrst hundred tokens of the original sequence and the completion contains the rest. We
then use the prompts to generate completions using the GPT-3 models with the temperature set to 0.4
in the OpenAI API. We use these model completions and the ‘completion’ portion of the human text
sequences to estimate total variation using a RoBERTa-large model in the same fashion as Section 4.
Using the ﬁrst hundred tokens of the human sequences as prompts allows us to control the context
in which the texts are generated. This allows us to compare the similarity of the generated texts to
human texts within the same context.
Figure 9a plots the total variation estimates of the GPT-3 models with respect to WebText for four
different sequence lengths 25, 50, 75, and 100 from the model completions. Similar to the GPT-2
models in § 4, we observe that the most powerful model Curie has the least total variation across all
sequence lengths. The model Babbage, however, does not follow this trend and exhibits a higher total
variation than even the least powerful model Ada.
Given that WebText contains data from a broad range of Internet sources, we also experiment with
more focused scenarios, such as generating content for scientiﬁc literature. We use the ArXiv abstracts
dataset as human text and estimate the total variation for the above three models (Figure 9b). We
observe that, for most sequence lengths, the total variation decreases across the series of models: Ada,
Babbage, and Curie. This provides further evidence that as language models improve in power their
outputs become more indistinguishable from human text, making them harder to detect.
5 Spooﬁng Attacks on AI-text Generative Models
A strong AI text detection scheme should have both low type-I error (i.e., human text detected
as AI-generated) and type-II error (i.e., AI-generated text not detected). An AI language detector
without a low type-I error can cause harm as it might wrongly accuse a human of plagiarizing using
an LLM. Moreover, an attacker (adversarial human) can generate a non-AI text that is detected to be
AI-generated. This is called the spooﬁng attack . An adversary can potentially launch spooﬁng attacks
to produce derogatory texts that are detected to be AI-generated to affect the reputation of the target
9https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-3
17
Human text%tokens in
green listz-score Detector output
the ﬁrst thing you do will be the best thing you do. this is
the reason why you do the ﬁrst thing very well. if most
of us did the ﬁrst thing so well this world would be a
lot better place. and it is a very well known fact. people
from every place know this fact. time will prove this
point to the all of us. as you get more money you will
also get this fact like other people do. all of us should
do the ﬁrst thing very well. hence the ﬁrst thing you do
will be the best thing you do.42.6 4.36 Watermarked
lot to and where is it about you know and where is it
about you know and where is it that not this we are not
him is it about you know and so for and go is it that.92.5 9.86 Watermarked
Table 5: Proof-of-concept human-generated texts ﬂagged as watermarked by the soft watermarking
scheme. In the ﬁrst row, a sensible sentence composed by an adversarial human contains 42:6%
tokens from the green list. In the second row, a nonsense sentence generated by an adversarial human
using our tool contains 92:5%green list tokens. The z-test threshold for watermark detection is 4.
Figure 10: Inferred green list score for the token “the”. The plot shows the top 50 words from our set
of common words that are likely to be in the green list. The word “ﬁrst” occurred 25% of the time
as sufﬁx to “the”.
LLM’s developers. In this section, as a proof-of-concept, we show that the soft watermarking [ 1] and
retrieval-based [4] detectors can be spoofed to detect texts composed by humans as watermarked.
5.1 Spooﬁng Attacks on Watermarked Models
Figure 11: ROC curve of a soft watermarking-based
detector [1] after our spooﬁng attack.In Kirchenbauer et al. [1], they watermark
LLM outputs by asserting the model to out-
put tokens with some speciﬁc pattern that
can be easily detected with meager error
rates. Soft watermarked texts are majorly
composed of green list tokens. If an ad-
versary can learn the green lists for the
soft watermarking scheme, they can use
this information to generate human-written
texts that are detected to be watermarked.
Our experiments show that the soft water-
marking scheme can be spoofed efﬁciently.
Though the soft watermarking detector can
detect the presence of a watermark very
accurately, it cannot be certain if this pat-
tern is actually generated by a human or an
LLM. An adversarial human can compose
derogatory watermarked texts in this fash-
ion that are detected to be watermarked, which might cause reputational damage to the developers of
the watermarked LLM. Therefore, it is important to study spooﬁng attacks to avoid such scenarios.
18
Detection Methods T@F F@T
Entropy threshold [24] 0.025 (0.045) 0.995 (0.845)
Likelihood threshold [22] 0.050 (0.075) 0.995 (0.310)
Logrank threshold 0.165 (0.155) 0.690 (0.190)
Rank threshold [24] 0.530 (0.335) 0.655 (0.590)
Roberta (base) OpenAI detector [3] 0.900 (0.765) 0.010 (0.035)
Roberta (large) OpenAI detector [3] 0.985 (0.990) 0.000 (0.000)
DetectGPT [2] 0.055 (0.240) 0.555 (0.145)
Table 6: True positive rates at 1%false positive rate (T@F) and false positive rates at 90% true
positive rate (F@T) after (before the attack in parentheses) the spooﬁng attack described in §5.3.
Bolded numbers show successful attacks where T@F decreases, or F@T increases after spooﬁng.
Figure 12: ROC curves before (left) and after (right) spooﬁng attack (§ 5.3). Most detectors exhibit
quality degradation after our spooﬁng attack.
In watermarking, the preﬁx word s(t 1)determines the green list for selecting the word s(t). The
attacker’s objective is to compute a proxy of green lists for the Nmost commonly used words in
the vocabulary. We use a small value of N= 181 for our experiments. The attacker queries the
watermarked OPT-1.3B [ 8]106times to observe pair-wise token occurrences in its output to estimate
green list score for theNtokens. A token with a high green list score for a preﬁx s(t)might be
in its green list (see Figure 10). We build a tool that helps adversarial humans create watermarked
sentences by providing them with proxy green list. In this manner, we can spoof watermarking models
easily. See Table 5 for example sentences created by an adversarial human. Figure 11 shows that the
performance of watermark-based detectors degrades signiﬁcantly in the presence of paraphrasing and
spooﬁng attacks, showing that they are not reliable.
5.2 Spooﬁng Attacks on Retrieval-based Defenses
Retrieval-based detectors store LLM outputs in a database. Although storing user-LLM conver-
sations can cause serious privacy concerns in the real world , they use this database to detect if
a candidate passage is AI-generated by searching for semantically similar passages. An adversary
with access to human-written passages can feed them into this database and later use the detector to
falsely accuse these humans of plagiarism. For our experiments, we consider outputs from DIPPER,
a paraphrasing LLM introduced in [ 4], as AI outputs. An adversary asks DIPPER to paraphrase 100
human passages from XSum, and this retrieval-based detector stores the paraphraser outputs in its
database. Our experiments show that the retrieval-based detector falsely classiﬁes all 100 human
passages as AI-generated. In our experiments, this retrieval-based detector achieves 0%human text
detection when spoofed.
5.3 Spooﬁng Attacks on Zero-Shot and Trained Detectors
We further show that zero-shot and trained detectors may also be vulnerable to spooﬁng attacks. In
this setting, a malicious adversary could write a short text in a collaborative work which may lead
to the entire text being classiﬁed as AI-generated. To simulate this, we prepend a human-written
text marked as AI-generated by the detector to all the other human-generated text for spooﬁng. In
other words, from the ﬁrst 200 samples in the XSum dataset, we pick the human text with the worst
detection score for each detector considered in § 2.2. We then prepend this text to all the other human
texts, ensuring that the length of the prepended text does not exceed the length of the original text.
19
We report the false positive rate ﬁxed at a true positive rate of 90% and the true positive rate at a
false positive rate of 1%in Table 6. The ROC curves before and after spooﬁng the detectors are
provided in Figure 12. Our experiments demonstrate that most of these detection methods show a
signiﬁcant increase in false positive rates at a ﬁxed true positive rate of 90% after spooﬁng. After this
naïve spooﬁng attack, the true positive rate at a false positive rate of 1%and AUROC scores of these
detectors drop signiﬁcantly.
6 Discussion
Recent advancements in NLP show that LLMs can generate human-like texts for a various number
of tasks [ 40]. However, this can create several challenges. LLMs can potentially be misused for
plagiarism, spamming, or even social engineering to manipulate the public. This creates a demand
for developing efﬁcient LLM text detectors to reduce the exploitation of publicly available LLMs.
Recent works propose a variety of AI text detectors using watermarking [ 1], zero-shot methods [ 2],
retrieval-based methods [ 4] and trained neural network-based classiﬁers [ 3]. In this paper, we show
both theoretically and empirically, that the state-of-the-art detectors cannot reliably detect LLM
outputs in practical scenarios. Our experiments show that paraphrasing the LLM outputs helps evade
these detectors effectively. Attackers can generate and spread misinformation using LLMs and use
neural network-based paraphrasers without getting detected. Moreover, our theory demonstrates that
for a sufﬁciently advanced language model, even the best detector can only perform marginally better
than a random classiﬁer. This means that for a detector to have both low type-I and type-II errors,
it will have to trade off the LLM’s performance. We also empirically show that watermarking and
retrieval-based detectors can be spoofed to make human-composed text detected as AI-generated.
For example, we show that it is possible for an attacker to learn the soft watermarking scheme in [ 1].
Using this information, an adversary can launch a spooﬁng attack where adversarial humans generate
texts that are detected to be watermarked. Spooﬁng attacks can lead to the generation of derogatory
passages detected as AI-generated that might affect the reputation of the LLM detector developers.
With the release of GPT-4 [ 40], the applications of LLMs are endless. This also calls for the need
for more secure methods to prevent their misuse. Here, we brieﬂy mention some methods attackers
might choose to break AI detectors in the future. As we demonstrated in this paper, the emergence
of improved paraphrasing models can be a severe threat to AI text detectors. Moreover, advanced
LLMs might be vulnerable to attacks based on smart prompting . For example, attackers could input a
prompt that starts with “Generate a sentence in active voice and present tense using only the following
set of words that I provide...”. High-performance LLMs would have a low entropy output space
(less number of likely output sequences) for this prompt, making it harder to add a strong LLM
signature in their output for detection. The soft watermarking scheme in [ 1] is vulnerable to this
attack. If the logits of the LLM have low entropy over the vocabulary, soft watermarking scheme
samples the token with the highest logit score (irrespective of the green list tokens) to preserve model
perplexity. Furthermore, in the future, we can expect more open-source LLMs to be available to
attackers. This could help attackers leverage these models to design transfer attacks to target a larger
LLM. Adversarial input prompts could be designed using transfer attacks such that the target LLM is
encouraged to have a low entropy output space. Future research on AI text detectors must be cautious
about these vulnerabilities.
A detector should ideally be helpful in reliably ﬂagging AI-generated texts to prevent the misuse of
LLMs. However, the cost of misidentiﬁcation by a detector can itself be huge. If the false positive
rate of the detector is not low enough, humans could get wrongly accused of plagiarism. Moreover,
a disparaging passage falsely detected to be AI-generated could affect the reputation of the LLM’s
developers. As a result, the practical applications of AI-text detectors can become unreliable and
invalid. Security methods need not be foolproof. However, we need to make sure that it is not an
easy task for an attacker to break these security defenses. Thus, analyzing the risks of using current
detectors can be vital to avoid creating a false sense of security. We hope that the results presented
in this work can encourage an open and honest discussion in the community about the ethical and
trustworthy applications of generative LLMs.
Recent follow-up work by Chakraborty et al. [41] has argued that AI-text detection is almost always
possible, even when the total variation between human and AI-generated distributions is low, through
boosting a detector’s performance via independent and identically distributed text samples. However,
this assumption of independence may not hold in most real-world applications as human-written text
20
often has correlations (e.g., the second sentence in a paragraph is usually related to the ﬁrst one, the
third sentence is related to the ﬁrst two, etc). If a detector makes a mistake on one sample, it will
likely make the same mistake on the other samples as well due to such correlations. It may also be
infeasible, in many real-world applications, to obtain several samples of the entire text. For instance,
it would be unreasonable to expect a student to submit several versions of their essay just to determine
whether it has been written using AI or not. Also, an adversary could mix both types of samples. For
example, an AI Twitter bot could evade detection by alternating between AI and human text.
Some other works (Mitchell et al. [42] and Kirchenbauer et al. [34]) argue that the outputs of most
existing LLMs are very different from any particular human being. This could be due to special
training methods like reinforcement learning with human feedback, or sampling procedures like the
greedy sampler. This could cause the total variation distance between the human and AI-generated
text distributions to be high. However, the central message of our impossibility results is that if an
adversary seeks to evade detection, their ability to do so improves as language models advance. Most
publicly available language models today are not designed to be stealthy. However, there are several
services out there whose primary goal is to not get detected10. Their ability to produce high-quality
text that does not get detected will most likely increase in the future. A detection mechanism that
works by making assumptions about the training or sampling procedure of the language model – or
any assumption at all about the model for that matter – may fail against an adversary that deliberately
violates them to avoid detection.
In addition to reliability issues of detectors that we have studied in this paper, a recent work by Liang
et al. [30] has shown that these detectors can be biased against non-native English writers. Thus,
having a small average type I and II errors may not be sufﬁcient to deploy a detector in practice: such
a detector may have very large errors within a sub-population of samples such as essays written by
non-native English writers or essays on a particular topic or with a particular writing style.
We hope that results and discussions presented in this work can initiate an honest discussion within
the community concerning the ethical and dependable utilization of AI-generated text in practice.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This project was supported in part by NSF CAREER AWARD 1942230, ONR YIP award N00014-22-
1-2271, NIST 60NANB20D134, Meta award 23010098, HR001119S0026 (GARD), Army Grant No.
W911NF2120076, a capital one grant, and the NSF award CCF2212458 and an Amazon Research
Award. Sadasivan is also supported by the Kulkarni Research Fellowship. The authors would
like to thank Keivan Rezaei and Mehrdad Saberi for their insights on this work. The authors also
acknowledge the use of OpenAI’s ChatGPT to improve clarity and readability.
References
[1]John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein.
A watermark for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10226 , 2023.
[2]Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn.
Detectgpt: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.11305 , 2023.
[3]OpenAI. Gpt-2: 1.5b release. November 2019. URL https://openai.com/research/
gpt-2-1-5b-release .
[4]Kalpesh Krishna, Yixiao Song, Marzena Karpinska, John Wieting, and Mohit Iyyer. Paraphras-
ing evades detectors of ai-generated text, but retrieval is an effective defense, 2023.
[5]Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022.
[6]Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
10Undetectable AI: https://undetectable.ai/ , StealthGPT: https://www.stealthgpt.ai/
21
Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.11487 , 2022.
[7]Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[8]Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen,
Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam
Shleifer, Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models, 2022. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2205.01068 .
[9]Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed
text-to-text transformer, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683 .
[10] OpenAI. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue. November 2022. URL https:
//openai.com/blog/chatgpt/ .
[11] David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Haotian Mai, Fuming Fang, Huy H Nguyen, Junichi Yamagishi, and
Isao Echizen. Generating sentiment-preserving fake online reviews using neural language
models and their human-and machine-based detection. In Advanced Information Networking
and Applications: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications (AINA-2020) , pages 1341–1354. Springer, 2020.
[12] Max Weiss. Deepfake bot submissions to federal public comment websites cannot be distin-
guished from human submissions. Technology Science , 2019121801, 2019.
[13] Jon Christian. Cnet secretly used ai on articles that didn’t disclose that fact, staff say. January
2023. URL https://futurism.com/cnet-ai-articles-label .
[14] Ganesh Jawahar, Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, and Laks VS Lakshmanan. Automatic detection
of machine generated text: A critical survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01314 , 2020.
[15] Anton Bakhtin, Sam Gross, Myle Ott, Yuntian Deng, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Arthur Szlam.
Real or fake? learning to discriminate machine from human generated text. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.03351 , 2019.
[16] T Fagni, F Falchi, M Gambini, A Martella, and M Tesconi. Tweepfake: About detecting
deepfake tweets. arxiv. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.00036 , 2020.
[17] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019.
[18] Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversar-
ial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 , 2014.
[19] Vinu Sankar Sadasivan, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Soheil Feizi. Cuda: Convolution-based
unlearnable datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04278 , 2023.
[20] Aounon Kumar, Alexander Levine, Tom Goldstein, and Soheil Feizi. Certifying model accuracy
under distribution shifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12440 , 2022.
[21] Wenxiao Wang, Alexander J Levine, and Soheil Feizi. Improved certiﬁed defenses against
data poisoning with (deterministic) ﬁnite aggregation. In International Conference on Machine
Learning , pages 22769–22783. PMLR, 2022.
[22] Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Jeff Wu,
Alec Radford, Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, et al. Release strategies and
the social impacts of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09203 , 2019.
22
[23] Daphne Ippolito, Daniel Duckworth, Chris Callison-Burch, and Douglas Eck. Automatic
detection of generated text is easiest when humans are fooled. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00650 ,
2019.
[24] Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander M Rush. Gltr: Statistical detection and
visualization of generated text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04043 , 2019.
[25] Mikhail J Atallah, Victor Raskin, Michael Crogan, Christian Hempelmann, Florian Kerschbaum,
Dina Mohamed, and Sanket Naik. Natural language watermarking: Design, analysis, and a
proof-of-concept implementation. In Information Hiding: 4th International Workshop, IH 2001
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, April 25–27, 2001 Proceedings 4 , pages 185–200. Springer, 2001.
[26] Alex Wilson, Phil Blunsom, and Andrew D Ker. Linguistic steganography on twitter: hier-
archical language modeling with manual interaction. In Media Watermarking, Security, and
Forensics 2014 , volume 9028, pages 9–25. SPIE, 2014.
[27] Xuandong Zhao, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Lei Li. Protecting language generation models via
invisible watermarking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03162 , 2023.
[28] Max Wolff. Attacking neural text detectors. CoRR , abs/2002.11768, 2020. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2002.11768 .
[29] Scott Aaronson. My ai safety lecture for ut effective altruism. November 2022. URL https:
//scottaaronson.blog/?p=6823 .
[30] Weixin Liang, Mert Yuksekgonul, Yining Mao, Eric Wu, and James Zou. Gpt detectors are
biased against non-native english writers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02819 , 2023.
[31] Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J. Liu. Pegasus: Pre-training with
extracted gap-sentences for abstractive summarization, 2019.
[32] Prithiviraj Damodaran. Parrot: Paraphrase generation for nlu., 2021.
[33] Ning Lu, Shengcai Liu, Rui He, Qi Wang, and Ke Tang. Large language models can be guided
to evade ai-generated text detection, 2023.
[34] John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Manli Shu, Khalid Saifullah, Kezhi Kong,
Kasun Fernando, Aniruddha Saha, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. On the reliability of
watermarks for large language models, 2023.
[35] Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t give me the details, just the
summary! topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization. ArXiv ,
abs/1808.08745, 2018.
[36] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
[37] Lenore Blum, Manuel Blum, and Mike Shub. Comparison of two pseudo-random number
generators. In Advances in Cryptology: Proceedings of CRYPTO ’82 , pages 61–78. Plenum,
1982.
[38] Manuel Blum and Silvio Micali. How to generate cryptographically strong sequences of
pseudorandom bits. SIAM Journal on Computing , 13(4):850–864, 1984. doi: 10.1137/0213053.
URL https://doi.org/10.1137/0213053 .
[39] Colin B. Clement, Matthew Bierbaum, Kevin P. O’Keeffe, and Alexander A. Alemi. On the use
of arxiv as a dataset, 2019.
[40] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. March 2023. URL https://cdn.openai.com/papers/
gpt-4.pdf .
[41] Souradip Chakraborty, Amrit Singh Bedi, Sicheng Zhu, Bang An, Dinesh Manocha, and Furong
Huang. On the possibilities of ai-generated text detection, 2023.
[42] Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn.
Detectgpt: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature. OpenReview ,
2023. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=UiAyIILXRd .
23