Title: Simple and Effective Multi-Paragraph Reading Comprehension

Simple and Effective Multi-Paragraph Reading Comprehension
Christopher Clark
University of Washington
csquared@cs.washington.eduMatt Gardner
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
mattg@allenai.org
Abstract
We consider the problem of adapting neural
paragraph-level question answering models to
the case where entire documents are given as
input. Our proposed solution trains models
to produce well calibrated conﬁdence scores
for their results on individual paragraphs. We
sample multiple paragraphs from the doc-
uments during training, and use a shared-
normalization training objective that encour-
ages the model to produce globally correct out-
put. We combine this method with a state-
of-the-art pipeline for training models on doc-
ument QA data. Experiments demonstrate
strong performance on several document QA
datasets. Overall, we are able to achieve a
score of 71.3 F1 on the web portion of Triv-
iaQA, a large improvement from the 56.7 F1
of the previous best system.
1 Introduction
Teaching machines to answer arbitrary user-
generated questions is a long-term goal of natural
language processing. For a wide range of ques-
tions, existing information retrieval methods are
capable of locating documents that are likely to
contain the answer. However, automatically ex-
tracting the answer from those texts remains an
open challenge. The recent success of neural mod-
els at answering questions given a related para-
graph (Wang et al., 2017b; Tan et al., 2017) sug-
gests neural models have the potential to be a key
part of a solution to this problem. Training and
testing neural models that take entire documents as
input is extremely computationally expensive, so
typically this requires adapting a paragraph-level
model to process document-level input.
There are two basic approaches to this task.
Pipelined approaches select a single paragraph
Work completed while interning at the Allen Institute
for Artiﬁcial Intelligencefrom the input documents, which is then passed to
the paragraph model to extract an answer (Joshi
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017a). Conﬁdence
based methods apply the model to multiple para-
graphs and returns the answer with the highest
conﬁdence (Chen et al., 2017). Conﬁdence meth-
ods have the advantage of being robust to errors
in the (usually less sophisticated) paragraph selec-
tion step, however they require a model that can
produce accurate conﬁdence scores for each para-
graph. As we shall show, naively trained models
often struggle to meet this requirement.
In this paper we start by proposing an improved
pipelined method which achieves state-of-the-art
results. Then we introduce a method for training
models to produce accurate per-paragraph conﬁ-
dence scores, and we show how combining this
method with multiple paragraph selection further
increases performance.
Our pipelined method focuses on addressing the
challenges that come with training on document-
level data. We propose a TF-IDF heuristic to select
which paragraphs to train and test on. Since anno-
tating entire documents is very expensive, data of
this sort is typically distantly supervised, mean-
ing only the answer text, not the answer spans,
are known. To handle the noise this creates, we
use a summed objective function that marginal-
izes the model’s output over all locations the an-
swer text occurs. We apply this approach with
a model design that integrates some recent ideas
in reading comprehension models, including self-
attention (Cheng et al., 2016) and bi-directional at-
tention (Seo et al., 2016).
Our conﬁdence method extends this approach
to better handle the multi-paragraph setting. Pre-
vious approaches trained the model on questions
paired with paragraphs that are known a priori to
contain the answer. This has several downsides:
the model is not trained to produce low conﬁdencearXiv:1710.10723v2  [cs.CL]  7 Nov 2017
scores for paragraphs that do not contain an an-
swer, and the training objective does not require
conﬁdence scores to be comparable between para-
graphs. We resolve these problems by sampling
paragraphs from the context documents, includ-
ing paragraphs that do not contain an answer, to
train on. We then use a shared-normalization ob-
jective where paragraphs are processed indepen-
dently, but the probability of an answer candidate
is marginalized over all paragraphs sampled from
the same document. This requires the model to
produce globally correct output even though each
paragraph is processed independently.
We evaluate our work on TriviaQA web (Joshi
et al., 2017), a dataset of questions paired with
web documents that contain the answer. We
achieve 71.3 F1 on the test set, a 15 point abso-
lute gain over prior work. We additionally perform
an ablation study on our pipelined method, and
we show the effectiveness of our multi-paragraph
methods on TriviaQA unﬁltered and a modiﬁed
version of SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) where
only the correct document, not the correct para-
graph, is known. We also build a demonstration
of our method by combining our model with a re-
implementation of the retrieval mechanism used
in TriviaQA to build a prototype end-to-end gen-
eral question answering system1. We release our
code2to facilitate future work in this ﬁeld.
2 Pipelined Method
In this section we propose an approach to train-
ing pipelined question answering systems, where a
single paragraph is heuristically extracted from the
context document(s) and passed to a paragraph-
level QA model. We suggest using a TF-IDF
based paragraph selection method and argue that
a summed objective function should be used to
handle noisy supervision. We also propose a re-
ﬁned model that incorporates some recent model-
ing ideas for reading comprehension systems.
2.1 Paragraph Selection
Our paragraph selection method chooses the para-
graph that has the smallest TF-IDF cosine dis-
tance with the question. Document frequencies
are computed using just the paragraphs within the
relevant documents, not the entire corpus. The
advantage of this approach is that if a question
word is prevalent in the context, for example if
1documentqa.allenai.org
2github.com/allenai/document-qathe word “tiger” is prevalent in the document(s)
for the question “What is the largest living sub-
species of the tiger?”, greater weight will be given
to question words that are less common, such as
“largest” or “sub-species”. Relative to selecting
the ﬁrst paragraph in the document, this improves
the chance of the selected paragraph containing
the correct answer from 83.1% to 85.1% on Triv-
iaQA web. We also expect this approach to do a
better job of selecting paragraphs that relate to the
question since it is explicitly selecting paragraphs
that contain question words.
2.2 Handling Noisy Labels
Question: Which British general was killed at Khartoum
in 1885?
Answer: Gordon
Context: In February 1885 Gordon returned to the Sudan
to evacuate Egyptian forces. Khartoum came under siege
the next month and rebels broke into the city, killing Gor-
don and the other defenders. The British public reacted to
his death by acclaiming ‘Gordon of Khartoum’, a saint.
However, historians have suggested that Gordon deﬁed
orders and refused to evacuate...
Figure 1: Noisy supervision causes many spans of text
that contain the answer, but are not situated in a con-
text that relates to the question, to be labelled as correct
answer spans (highlighted in red). This risks distract-
ing the model from learning from more relevant spans
(highlighted in green).
In a distantly supervised setup we label all text
spans that match the answer text as being correct.
This can lead to training the model to select un-
wanted answer spans. Figure 1 contains an exam-
ple. To handle this difﬁculty, we use a summed
objective function similar to the one from Kadlec
et al. (2016), that optimizes the sum of the proba-
bilities of all answer spans. The models we con-
sider here work by independently predicting the
start and end token of the answer span, so we take
this approach for both predictions. Thus the ob-
jective for the span start boundaries becomes:
 logP
k2Aesk
Pn
i=1esi
whereAis the set of tokens that start an answer
span,nis the number of context tokens, and siis
a scalar score computed by the model for span i.
This optimizes the negative log-likelihood of se-
lecting any correct start token. This objective is
agnostic to how the model distributes probability
mass across the possible answer spans, thus the
model can “choose” to focus on only the more rel-
evant spans.
2.3 Model
Figure 2: High level outline of our model.
We use a model with the following layers
(shown in Figure 2):
Embedding: We embed words using pre-
trained word vectors. We also embed the char-
acters in each word into size 20 vectors which
are learned, and run a convolution neural network
followed by max-pooling to get character-derived
embeddings for each word. The character-level
and word-level embeddings are then concatenated
and passed to the next layer. We do not update the
word embeddings during training.
Pre-Process: A shared bi-directional
GRU (Cho et al., 2014) is used to map the
question and passage embeddings to context-
aware embeddings.
Attention: The bi-directional attention mech-
anism from the Bi-Directional Attention Flow
(BiDAF) model (Seo et al., 2016) is used to build
a query-aware context representation. Let hibethe vector for context word i,qjbe the vector for
question word j, andnqandncbe the lengths of
the question and context respectively. We com-
pute attention between context word iand ques-
tion wordjas:
aij=w1hi+w2qj+w3(hiqj)
where w1,w2, and w3are learned vectors and 
is element-wise multiplication. We then compute
an attended vector cifor each context token as:
pij=eaij
Pnq
j=1eaij
ci=nqX
j=1qjpij
We also compute a query-to-context vector qc:
mi= max
1jnqaij
pi=emi
Pnc
i=1emi
qc=ncX
i=1hipi
The ﬁnal vector computed for each token is built
by concatenating hi,ci,hici, and qcci. In
our model we subsequently pass the result through
a linear layer with ReLU activations.
Self-Attention: Next we use a layer of residual
self-attention. The input is passed through another
bi-directional GRU. Then we apply the same at-
tention mechanism, only now between the passage
and itself. In this case we do not use query-to-
context attention and we set aij= infifi=j.
As before, we pass the concatenated output
through a linear layer with ReLU activations. This
layer is applied residually, so this output is addi-
tionally summed with the input.
Prediction: In the last layer of our model a bi-
directional GRU is applied, followed by a linear
layer that computes answer start scores for each
token. The hidden states of that layer are con-
catenated with the input and fed into a second bi-
directional GRU and linear layer to predict answer
end scores. The softmax operation is applied to
the start and end scores to produce start and end
probabilities, and we optimize the negative log-
likelihood of selecting correct start and end tokens.
Dropout: We also employ variational dropout,
where a randomly selected set of hidden units
are set to zero across all time steps during train-
ing (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016). We dropout the
input to all the GRUs, including the word embed-
dings, as well as the input to the attention mecha-
nisms, at a rate of 0.2.
3 Conﬁdence Method
We adapt this model to the multi-paragraph setting
by using the un-normalized and un-exponentiated
(i.e., before the softmax operator is applied) score
given to each span as a measure of the model’s
conﬁdence. For the boundary-based models we
use here, a span’s score is the sum of the start and
end score given to its start and end token. At test
time we run the model on each paragraph and se-
lect the answer span with the highest conﬁdence.
This is the approach taken by Chen et al. (2017).
Applying this approach without altering how
the model is trained is, however, a gamble; the
training objective does not require these conﬁ-
dence scores to be comparable between para-
graphs. Our experiments in Section 5 show that in
practice these models can be very poor at provid-
ing good conﬁdence scores. Table 1 shows some
qualitative examples of this phenomenon.
We hypothesize that there are two key reasons a
model’s conﬁdence scores might not be well cal-
ibrated. First, for models trained with the soft-
max objective, the pre-softmax scores for all spans
can be arbitrarily increased or decreased by a con-
stant value without changing the resulting softmax
probability distribution. As a result, nothing pre-
vents models from producing scores that are arbi-
trarily all larger or all smaller for one paragraph
than another. Second, if the model only sees para-
graphs that contain answers, it might become too
conﬁdent in heuristics or patterns that are only ef-
fective when it is known a priori that an answer
exists. For example, in Table 1 we observe that the
model will assign high conﬁdence values to spans
that strongly match the category of the answer,
even if the question words do not match the con-
text. This might work passably well if an answer
is present, but can lead to highly over-conﬁdent
extractions in other cases. Similar kinds of errors
have been observed when distractor sentences are
added to the context (Jia and Liang, 2017).
We experiment with four approaches to training
models to produce comparable conﬁdence scores,
shown in the follow subsections. In all cases we
will sample paragraphs that do not contain an an-
swer as additional training points.3.1 Shared-Normalization
In this approach all paragraphs are processed in-
dependently as usual. However, a modiﬁed objec-
tive function is used where the normalization fac-
tor in the softmax operation is shared between all
paragraphs from the same context. Therefore, the
probability that token afrom paragraph pstarts an
answer span is computed as:
esap
P
j2PPnj
i=1esij
wherePis the set of paragraphs that are from the
same context as p, andsijis the score given to to-
kenifrom paragraph j. We train on this objective
by including multiple paragraphs from the same
context in each mini-batch.
This is similar to simply feeding the model mul-
tiple paragraphs from each context concatenated
together, except that each paragraph is processed
independently until the normalization step. The
key idea is that this will force the model to produce
scores that are comparable between paragraphs,
even though it does not have access to information
about the other paragraphs being considered.
3.2 Merge
As an alternative to the previous method, we ex-
periment with concatenating all paragraphs sam-
pled from the same context together during train-
ing. A paragraph separator token with a learned
embedding is added before each paragraph. Our
motive is to test whether simply exposing the
model to more text will teach the model to be more
adept at ignoring irrelevant text.
3.3 No-Answer Option
We also experiment with allowing the model to se-
lect a special “no-answer” option for each para-
graph. First, note that the independent-bounds ob-
jective can be re-written as:
 logesa
Pn
i=1esi
 log 
egb
Pn
j=1egj!
=
 log 
esagb
Pn
i=1Pn
j=1esigj!
wheresjandgjare the scores for the start and end
bounds produced by the model for token j, anda
andbare the correct start and end tokens. We have
the model compute another score, z, to represent
Question Low Conﬁdence Correct Extraction High Conﬁdence Incorrect Extraction
When is the Members
Debate held?Immediately after Decision Time a “Mem-
bers Debate” is held, which lasts for 45 min-
utes......majority of the Scottish electorate voted for
it in a referendum to be held on 1 March
1979 that represented at least...
How many tree species
are in the rainforest?...plant species is the highest on Earth with
one 2001 study ﬁnding a quarter square kilo-
meter (62 acres) of Ecuadorian rainforest
supports more than 1,100 tree speciesThe affected region was approximately
1,160,000 square miles (3,000,000 km2) of
rainforest, compared to 734,000 square miles
Who was Warsz?....In actuality, Warsz was a 12th/13th century
nobleman who owned a village located at the
modern....One of the most famous people born in War-
saw was Maria Sklodowska - Curie , who
achieved international...
How much did the ini-
tial LM weight in kg?The initial LM model weighed approximately
33,300 pounds ( 15,000 kg), and...The module was 11.42 feet (3.48 m) tall,
and weighed approximately 12,250 pounds
(5,560 kg)
What do the auricles
do?...many species of lobates have four auricles,
gelatinous projections edged with cilia that
produce water currents that help direct
microscopic prey toward the mouth ...The Cestida are ribbon - shaped planktonic
animals, with the mouth and aboral organ
aligned in the middle of opposite edges of
the ribbon
Table 1: Examples from SQuAD where a paragraph-level model was less conﬁdent in a correct extraction from
one paragraph (left) than in an incorrect extraction from another (right). Even if the passage has no correct answer,
the model still assigns high conﬁdence to phrases that match the category the question is asking about. Because
the conﬁdence scores are not well-calibrated, this conﬁdence is often higher than the conﬁdence assigned to the
correct answer span.
the weight given to a “no-answer” possibility. Our
revised objective function becomes:
 log 
(1 )ez+esagb
ez+Pn
i=1Pn
j=1esigj!
whereis 1 if an answer exists and 0 otherwise. If
there are multiple answer spans we use the same
objective, except the numerator includes the sum-
mation over all answer start and end tokens.
We compute zby adding an extra layer at the
end of our model. We compute a soft attention
over the span start scores, pi=esiPn
j=1esj, and then
take the weighted sum of the hidden states from
the GRU used to generate those scores, hi, giving
v1=Pn
i=1hipi. We compute a second vector,
v2in the same way using the end scores. Finally,
a step of learned attention is performed on the out-
put of the Self-Attention layer that computes:
ai=whi
pi=eai
Pn
j=1eaj
v3=nX
i=1hipi
where wis a learned weight vector and hiis the
vector for token i.
We concatenate these three vectors and use
them as input to a two layer network with an 80 di-
mensional hidden layer and ReLU activations that
produceszas its only output.3.4 Sigmoid
As a ﬁnal baseline, we consider training models
with the sigmoid loss objective function. That is,
we compute a start/end probability for each token
in the context by applying the sigmoid function to
the start/end scores of each token. A cross entropy
loss is used on each individual probability. The in-
tuition is that, since the scores are being evaluated
independently of one another, they will be compa-
rable between different paragraphs.
4 Experimental Setup
4.1 Datasets
We evaluate our approach on three datasets: Triv-
iaQA unﬁltered (Joshi et al., 2017), a dataset of
questions from trivia databases paired with docu-
ments found by completing a web search of the
questions; TriviaQA web, a dataset derived from
TriviaQA unﬁltered by treating each question-
document pair where the document contains the
question answer as an individual training point;
and SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), a collection
of Wikipedia articles and crowdsourced questions.
4.2 Preprocessing
We note that for TriviaQA web we do not sub-
sample as was done by Joshi et al. (2017), in-
stead training on the full 530k question-document
training pairs. We also observed that the metrics
for TriviaQA are computed after applying a small
amount of text normalization (stripping punctua-
tion, removing articles, ect.) to both the ground
truth text and the predicted text. As a result, some
spans of text that would have been considered an
exact match after normalization were not marked
as answer spans during preprocessing, which only
detected exact string matches. We ﬁx this issue
by labeling all spans of text that would have been
considered an exact match by the ofﬁcial evalua-
tion script as an answer span.
In TriviaQA, documents often contain many
small paragraphs, so we merge paragraphs to-
gether as needed to get paragraphs of up to a tar-
get size. We use a maximum size of 400 unless
stated otherwise. Paragraph separator tokens with
learned embeddings are added between merged
paragraphs to preserve formatting information.
4.3 Sampling
Our conﬁdence-based approaches are all trained
by sampling paragraphs, including paragraphs
that do not contain an answer, during training.
For SQuAD and TriviaQA web we take the top
four paragraphs ranked by TF-IDF score for each
question-document pair. We then sample two dif-
ferent paragraphs from this set each epoch. Since
we observe that the higher-ranked paragraphs are
much more likely to contain the context needed to
answer the question, we sample the highest ranked
paragraph that contains an answer twice as often
as the others. For the merge and shared-norm ap-
proaches, we additionally require that at least one
of the paragraphs contains an answer span.
For TriviaQA unﬁltered, where we have multi-
ple documents for each question, we ﬁnd it bene-
ﬁcial to use a more sophisticated paragraph rank-
ing function. In particular, we use a linear func-
tion with ﬁve features: the TF-IDF cosine dis-
tance, whether the paragraph was the ﬁrst in its
document, how many tokens occur before it, and
the number of case insensitive and case sensitive
matches with question words. The function is
trained on the distantly supervised objective of se-
lecting paragraphs that contain at least one answer
span. We select the top 16 paragraphs for each
question and sample pairs of paragraphs as before.
4.4 Implementation
We train the model with the Adadelta opti-
mizer (Zeiler, 2012) with a batch size 60 for Triv-
iaQA and 45 for SQuAD. At test time we select
the most probable answer span of length less thanModel EM F1
baseline (Joshi et al., 2017) 41.08 47.40
BiDAF 50.21 56.86
BiDAF + TF-IDF 53.41 59.18
BiDAF + sum 56.22 61.48
BiDAF + TF-IDF + sum 57.20 62.44
our model + TF-IDF + sum 61.10 66.04
Table 2: Results on TriviaQA web using our pipelined
method. We signiﬁcantly improve upon the baseline by
combining the preprocessing procedures, TF-IDF para-
graph selection, the sum objective, and our model de-
sign.
or equal to 8 for TriviaQA and 17 for SQuAD.
The GloVe 300 dimensional word vectors released
by Pennington et al. (2014) are used for word em-
beddings. On SQuAD, we use a dimensionality
of size 100 for the GRUs and of size 200 for the
linear layers employed after each attention mech-
anism. We ﬁnd for TriviaQA, likely because there
is more data, using a larger dimensionality of 140
for each GRU and 280 for the linear layers is bene-
ﬁcial. During training, we maintain an exponential
moving average of the weights with a decay rate of
0.999. We use the weight averages at test time.
5 Results
5.1 TriviaQA Web
First, we do an ablation study on TriviaQA web
to show the effects of our proposed methods for
our pipeline model. We start with an implementa-
tion of the baseline from (Joshi et al., 2017). Their
system selects paragraphs by taking the ﬁrst 400
tokens of each document, uses BiDAF (Seo et al.,
2016) as the paragraph model, and selects a ran-
dom answer span from each paragraph each epoch
to be used in BiDAF’s cross entropy loss function
during training. Paragraphs of size 800 are used
at test time. As shown in Table 2, our implemen-
tation of this approach outperforms the results re-
ported by Joshi et al. (2017) signiﬁcantly, likely
because we are not subsampling the data. We
ﬁnd both TF-IDF ranking and the sum objective to
be effective; even without changing the model we
achieve state-of-the-art results. Using our reﬁned
model increases the gain by another 4 points.
Next we show the results of our conﬁdence-
based approaches. In this setting we group each
document’s text into paragraphs of at most 400 to-
kens and rank them using our TF-IDF heuristic.
Then we measure the performance of our proposed
1 3 5 7 911 13 15
Number of Paragraphs0.620.640.660.680.70F1 ScoreTriviaQA Web F1 vs. Number of Paragraphs
none
sigmoid
merge
no-answer
shared-norm
13579111315
Number of Paragraphs0.740.760.780.800.820.84F1 ScoreTriviaQA Web Verified F1 vs. Number of Paragraphs
none
sigmoid
merge
no-answer
shared-normFigure 3: Results on TriviaQA web (left) and veriﬁed TriviaQA web (right) when applying our models to multiple
paragraphs from each document. The shared-norm, merge, and no-answer training methods improve the model’s
ability to utilize more text, with the shared-norm method being signiﬁcantly ahead of the others on the veriﬁed set
and tied with the merge approach on the general set.
Model All Veriﬁed
EM F1 EM F1
baseline (Joshi et al., 2017) 40.74 47.06 49.54 55.80
MEMEN* (Pan et al., 2017) 43.16 46.90 49.28 55.83
Mnemonic Reader (Hu et al., 2017) 46.94 52.85 54.45 59.46
Reading Twice for NLU (Weissenborn et al., 2017a) 50.56 56.73 63.20 67.97
S-Norm (ours) 66.37 71.32 79.97 83.70
*Results on the dev set
Table 3: Published TriviaQA results. We advance the state of the art by about 15 points both test sets.
approaches as the model is used to independently
process an increasing number of these paragraphs
and the model’s most conﬁdent answer is returned.
We additionally measure performance on the ver-
iﬁed portion of TriviaQA, a small subset of the
question-document pairs in TriviaQA web where
humans have manually veriﬁed that the document
contains sufﬁcient context to answer the question.
The results are shown in Figure 3.
On these datasets even the model trained with-
out any of the proposed training methods (“none”)
improves as it is allowed to use more text, show-
ing it does a passable job at focusing on the cor-
rect paragraph. The no-answer option training ap-
proach lead to a signiﬁcant improvement, and the
shared-norm and merge approach are even better.
On the veriﬁed set, the shared-norm approach is
solidly ahead of the other options. This suggests
the shared-norm model is better at extracting an-
swers when it is clearly stated in the text, but worse
at guessing the answer in other cases.
We use the shared-norm approach for evalua-
tion on the TriviaQA test set. We found that in-
creasing the paragraph size to 800 at test time,
and re-training the model on paragraphs of size
600, was slightly beneﬁcial, allowing our model toreach 66.04 EM and 70.98 F1 on the dev set. We
submitted this model to be evaluated on the Triv-
iaQA test set and achieved 66.37 EM and 71.32
F1, ﬁrmly ahead of prior work, as shown in Ta-
ble 3. Note that human annotators have estimated
that only 75.4% of the question-document pairs
contain sufﬁcient evidence to answer the ques-
tion (Joshi et al., 2017), which suggests we are ap-
proaching the upper bound for this task. However,
the score of 83.7 F1 on the veriﬁed set suggests
that there is still room for improvement.
5.2 TriviaQA Unﬁltered
Next we apply our conﬁdence methods to Trivi-
aQA unﬁltered. This dataset is of particular inter-
est because the system is not told which document
contains the answer, so it provides a plausible sim-
ulation of attempting to answer a question using
a document retrieval system. We show the same
graph as before for this dataset in Figure 4. On
this dataset it is more important to train the model
to produce well calibrated conﬁdence scores. Note
the base model starts to lose performance as more
paragraphs are used, showing that errors are be-
ing caused by the model being overly conﬁdent in
incorrect extractions.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Number of Paragraphs0.560.580.600.620.640.66F1 ScoreUnfiltered TriviaQA F1 vs. Number of Paragraphs
none
sigmoid
merge
no-answer
shared-normFigure 4: Results for our conﬁdence methods on Triv-
iaQA unﬁltered. Here we see a more dramatic differ-
ence between these models. The shared-norm approach
is the strongest, while the base model starts to lose per-
formance as more paragraphs are used.
Dev Test
Model EM F1 EM F1
none 71.60 80.78 72.14 81.05
sigmoid 70.28 79.05 - -
merge 71.20 80.26 - -
no-answer 71.51 80.71 - -
shared-norm 71.16 80.23 - -
Table 4: Results on the standard SQuAD dataset. The
test scores place our model as 8th on the SQuAD leader
board among non-ensemble models3. Training with the
proposed multi-paragraph approaches only leads to a
marginal drop in performance in this setting.
5.3 SQuAD
We additionally evaluate our model on SQuAD.
SQuAD questions were not built to be answered
independently of their context paragraph, which
makes it unclear how effective of an evaluation
tool they can be for document-level question an-
swering. To assess this we manually label 500
random questions from the training set. We cat-
egorize questions as:
1. Context-independent, meaning it can be un-
derstood independently of the paragraph.
2. Document-dependent, meaning it can be un-
derstood given the article’s title. For exam-
ple, “What individual is the school named af-
ter?” for the document “Harvard University”.
3. Paragraph-dependent, meaning it can only be
understood given its paragraph. For example,
“What was the ﬁrst step in the reforms?”.
3as of 10/23/2017
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15
Number of Paragraphs0.5500.5750.6000.6250.6500.6750.7000.725F1 ScoreSQuAD F1 vs. Number of Paragraphs
none
sigmoid
merge
no-answer
shared-normFigure 5: Results for our conﬁdence methods on
document-level SQuAD. The base model does poorly
in this case, rapidly losing performance once more than
two paragraphs are used. While all our approaches had
some beneﬁt, the shared-norm model is the strongest,
and is the only one to not lose performance as large
numbers of paragraphs are used.
We ﬁnd 67.4% of the questions to be context-
independent, 22.6% to be document-dependent,
and the remaining 10% to be paragraph-
dependent. The many document-dependent ques-
tions stem from the fact that questions are fre-
quently about the subject of the document, so
the article’s title is often sufﬁcient to resolve co-
references or ambiguities that appear in the ques-
tion. Since a reasonably high fraction of the ques-
tions can be understood given the document they
are from, and to isolate our analysis from the re-
trieval mechanism used, we choose to evaluate on
the document-level. We build documents by con-
catenating all the paragraphs in SQuAD from the
same article together into a single document.
The performance of our models given the cor-
rect paragraph (i.e., in the standard SQuAD set-
ting), is shown in Table 4. Our paragraph-level
model is competitive on this task, and our vari-
ations to handle the multi-paragraph setting only
cause a minor loss of performance.
We graph the document-level performance in
Figure 5. For SQuAD, we ﬁnd it crucial to em-
ploy one of the suggested conﬁdence training tech-
niques. The base model starts to drop in perfor-
mance once more than two paragraphs are used.
However, the shared-norm approach is able to
reach a peak performance of 72.37 F1 and 64.08
EM given 15 paragraphs. Given our estimate that
10% of the questions are ambiguous if the para-
graph is unknown, our approach appears to have
adapted to the document-level task very well.
Finally, we compare the shared-norm model
with the document-level result reported by Chen
et al. (2017). We re-evaluate our model using the
documents used by Chen et al. (2017), which con-
sist of the same Wikipedia articles SQuAD was
built from, but downloaded at different dates. The
advantage of this dataset is that it does not allow
the model to know a priori which paragraphs were
ﬁltered out during the construction of SQuAD.
The disadvantage is that some of the articles have
been edited since the questions were written, so
some questions may no longer be answerable. Our
model achieves 59.14 EM and 67.34 F1 on this
dataset, which signiﬁcantly outperforms the 49.7
EM reported by Chen et al. (2017).
5.4 Discussion
We found that models that have only been trained
on answer-containing paragraphs can perform
very poorly in the multi-paragraph setting. The
results were particularly bad for SQuAD, we think
this is partly because the paragraphs are shorter,
so the model had less exposure to irrelevant text.
In general, we found the shared-norm approach to
be the most effective way to resolve this problem.
The no-answer and merge approaches were mod-
erately effective, but we note that they do not re-
solve the scaling problem inherent to the softmax
objective we discussed in Section 3, which might
be why they lagged behind. The sigmoid objective
function reduces the paragraph-level performance
considerably, especially on the TriviaQA datasets.
We suspect this is because it is vulnerable to label
noise, as discussed in Section 2.2.
6 Related Work
Reading Comprehension Datasets. The state of
the art in reading comprehension has been rapidly
advanced by neural models, in no small part due
to the introduction of many large datasets. The
ﬁrst large scale datasets for training neural reading
comprehension models used a Cloze-style task,
where systems must predict a held out word from
a piece of text (Hermann et al., 2015; Hill et al.,
2015). Additional datasets including SQuAD (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016), WikiReading (Hewlett et al.,
2016), MS Marco (Nguyen et al., 2016) and Triv-
iaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) provided more realis-
tic questions. Another dataset of trivia questions,
Quasar-T (Dhingra et al., 2017), was introduced
recently that uses ClueWeb09 (Callan et al., 2009)
as its source for documents. In this work we
choose to focus on SQuAD and TriviaQA.
Neural Reading Comprehension. Neuralreading comprehension systems typically use
some form of attention (Wang and Jiang, 2016), al-
though alternative architectures exist (Chen et al.,
2017; Weissenborn et al., 2017b). Our model
follows this approach, but includes some re-
cent advances such as variational dropout (Gal
and Ghahramani, 2016) and bi-directional atten-
tion (Seo et al., 2016). Self-attention has been
used in several prior works (Cheng et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2017b; Pan et al., 2017). Our
approach to allowing a reading comprehension
model to produce a per-paragraph no-answer score
is related to the approach used in the BiDAF-
T (Min et al., 2017) model to produce per-sentence
classiﬁcation scores, although we use an attention-
based method instead of max-pooling.
Open QA. Open question answering has been
the subject of much research, especially spurred
by the TREC question answering track (V oorhees
et al., 1999). Knowledge bases can be used,
such as in (Berant et al., 2013), although the re-
sulting systems are limited by the quality of the
knowledge base. Systems that try to answer ques-
tions using natural language resources such as
YodaQA (Baudi ˇs, 2015) typically use pipelined
methods to retrieve related text, build answer can-
didates, and pick a ﬁnal output.
Neural Open QA. Open question answering
with neural models was considered by Chen et al.
(2017), where researchers trained a model on
SQuAD and combined it with a retrieval engine
for Wikipedia articles. Our work differs because
we focus on explicitly addressing the problem of
applying the model to multiple paragraphs. A
pipelined approach to QA was recently proposed
by Wang et al. (2017a), where a ranker model is
used to select a paragraph for the reading compre-
hension model to process.
7 Conclusion
We have shown that, when using a paragraph-level
QA model across multiple paragraphs, our train-
ing method of sampling non-answer containing
paragraphs while using a shared-norm objective
function can be very beneﬁcial. Combining this
with our suggestions for paragraph selection, us-
ing the summed training objective, and our model
design allows us to advance the state of the art
on TriviaQA by a large stride. As shown by our
demo, this work can be directly applied to build-
ing deep learning powered open question answer-
ing systems.
References
Petr Baudi ˇs. 2015. YodaQA: A Modular Question An-
swering System Pipeline. In POSTER 2015-19th In-
ternational Student Conference on Electrical Engi-
neering . pages 1156–1165.
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy
Liang. 2013. Semantic Parsing on Freebase from
Question-Answer Pairs. In EMNLP .
Jamie Callan, Mark Hoy, Changkuk Yoo, and Le Zhao.
2009. Clueweb09 Data Set.
Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and An-
toine Bordes. 2017. Reading Wikipedia to An-
swer Open-Domain Questions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.00051 .
Jianpeng Cheng, Li Dong, and Mirella Lapata. 2016.
Long Short-Term Memory-Networks for Machine
Reading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06733 .
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merri ¨enboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning
phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder
for statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.1078 .
Bhuwan Dhingra, Kathryn Mazaitis, and William W
Cohen. 2017. Quasar: Datasets for Question An-
swering by Search and Reading. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.03904 .
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2016. A Theoreti-
cally Grounded Application of Dropout in Recurrent
Neural Networks. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems .
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward
Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Su-
leyman, and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching Ma-
chines to Read and Comprehend. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems .
Daniel Hewlett, Alexandre Lacoste, Llion Jones, Illia
Polosukhin, Andrew Fandrianto, Jay Han, Matthew
Kelcey, and David Berthelot. 2016. Wikireading:
A Novel Large-scale Language Understanding Task
over Wikipedia. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03542 .
Felix Hill, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Jason
Weston. 2015. The Goldilocks Principle: Reading
Children’s Books with Explicit Memory Represen-
tations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02301 .
Minghao Hu, Yuxing Peng, and Xipeng Qiu. 2017.
Mnemonic Reader: Machine Comprehension with
Iterative Aligning and Multi-hop Answer Pointing .
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2017. Adversarial Ex-
amples for Evaluating Reading Comprehension Sys-
tems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.07328 .Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A Large Scale Dis-
tantly Supervised Challenge Dataset for Reading
Comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551
.
Rudolf Kadlec, Martin Schmid, Ondrej Bajgar, and
Jan Kleindienst. 2016. Text understanding with
the attention sum reader network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.01547 .
Sewon Min, Minjoon Seo, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
2017. Question Answering through Transfer Learn-
ing from Large Fine-grained Supervision Data.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.02171 .
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao,
Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and Li Deng.
2016. MS MARCO: A Human Generated MAchine
Reading COmprehension Dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.09268 .
Boyuan Pan, Hao Li, Zhou Zhao, Bin Cao, Deng Cai,
and Xiaofei He. 2017. MEMEN: Multi-layer Em-
bedding with Memory Networks for Machine Com-
prehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09098 .
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global Vectors for
Word Representation. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions
for Machine Comprehension of Text. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05250 .
Min Joon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi,
and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2016. Bidirectional At-
tention Flow for Machine Comprehension. CoRR
abs/1611.01603.
Chuanqi Tan, Furu Wei, Nan Yang, Weifeng Lv, and
Ming Zhou. 2017. S-net: From answer extraction to
answer generation for machine reading comprehen-
sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04815 .
Ellen M V oorhees et al. 1999. The TREC-8 Question
Answering Track Report. In Trec.
Shuohang Wang and Jing Jiang. 2016. Machine
Comprehension Using Match-LSTM and Answer
Pointer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.07905 .
Shuohang Wang, Mo Yu, Xiaoxiao Guo, Zhiguo Wang,
Tim Klinger, Wei Zhang, Shiyu Chang, Gerald
Tesauro, Bowen Zhou, and Jing Jiang. 2017a. R:
Reinforced Reader-Ranker for Open-Domain Ques-
tion Answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00023
.
Wenhui Wang, Nan Yang, Furu Wei, Baobao Chang,
and Ming Zhou. 2017b. Gated self-matching net-
works for reading comprehension and question an-
swering. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers) . volume 1, pages 189–198.
Dirk Weissenborn, Tom Koisk, and Chris Dyer.
2017a. Dynamic Integration of Background Knowl-
edge in Neural NLU Systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.02596 .
Dirk Weissenborn, Georg Wiese, and Laura Seiffe.
2017b. FastQA: A Simple and Efﬁcient Neural Ar-
chitecture for Question Answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.04816 .
Matthew D Zeiler. 2012. Adadelta: an adaptive learn-
ing rate method. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.5701 .