Title: The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research

The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research
ABEBA BIRHANE∗,Mozilla Foundation & School of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Ireland
PRATYUSHA KALLURI*, Computer Science Department, Stanford University, USA
DALLAS CARD*, School of Information, University of Michigan, USA
WILLIAM AGNEW*, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, USA
RAVIT DOTAN*, Center for Philosophy of Science, University of Pittsburgh, USA
MICHELLE BAO*, Computer Science Department, Stanford University, USA
Machine learning currently exerts an outsized influence on the world, increasingly affecting institutional practices and impacted
communities. It is therefore critical that we question vague conceptions of the field as value-neutral or universally beneficial, and
investigate what specific values the field is advancing. In this paper, we first introduce a method and annotation scheme for studying
the values encoded in documents such as research papers. Applying the scheme, we analyze 100 highly cited machine learning papers
published at premier machine learning conferences, ICML and NeurIPS. We annotate key features of papers which reveal their values:
their justification for their choice of project, which attributes of their project they uplift, their consideration of potential negative
consequences, and their institutional affiliations and funding sources. We find that few of the papers justify how their project connects
to a societal need (15%) and far fewer discuss negative potential (1%). Through line-by-line content analysis, we identify 59 values that
are uplifted in ML research, and, of these, we find that the papers most frequently justify and assess themselves based on Performance,
Generalization, Quantitative evidence, Efficiency, Building on past work, and Novelty. We present extensive textual evidence and
identify key themes in the definitions and operationalization of these values. Notably, we find systematic textual evidence that these
top values are being defined and applied with assumptions and implications generally supporting the centralization of power. Finally,
we find increasingly close ties between these highly cited papers and tech companies and elite universities.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Encoded values of ML, ICML, NeurIPS, Corporate ties, Power asymmetries
1 INTRODUCTION
Over recent decades, machine learning (ML) has risen from a relatively obscure research area to an extremely influential
discipline, actively being deployed in myriad applications and contexts around the world. Current discussions of ML
frequently follow a historical strain of thinking which has tended to frame technology as "neutral", based on the
notion that new technologies can be unpredictably applied for both beneficial and harmful purposes [ 65]. This claim of
neutrality frequently serves as an insulation from critiques of AI and as permission to emphasize the benefits of AI
[48,59,64], often without any acknowledgment that benefits and harms are distributed unevenly. Although it is rare to
see anyone explicitly argue in print that ML is neutral, related ideas are part of contemporary conversation, including
these canonical claims: long term impacts are too difficult to predict; sociological impacts are outside the expertise or
purview of ML researchers [ 29]; critiques of AI are really misdirected critiques of those deploying AI with bad data
("garbage in, garbage out"), again outside the purview of many AI researchers; and proposals such as broader impact
statements represent merely a "bureaucratic constraint" [ 3]. ML research is often cast as value-neutral and emphasis is
placed on positive applications or potentials. Yet, the objectives and values of ML research are influenced by many
social forces that shape factors including what research gets done and who benefits.1Therefore, it is important to
∗All authors contributed equally to this research.
1For example, ML research is influenced by social factors including the personal preferences of researchers and reviewers, other work in science and
engineering, the interests of academic institutions, funding agencies and companies, and larger systemic pressures, including systems of oppression.
1arXiv:2106.15590v2  [cs.LG]  21 Jun 2022
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
challenge perceptions of neutrality and universal benefit, and document and understand the emergent values of the
field: what specifically the field is prioritizing and working toward. To this end, we perform an in-depth analysis of 100
highly cited NeurIPS and ICML papers from four recent years.
Our key contributions are as follows:
(1)We present and open source a fine-grained annotation scheme for the study of values in documents
such as research papers.2To our knowledge, our annotation scheme is the first of its kind and opens the
door to further qualitative and quantitative analyses of research. This is a timely methodological contribution,
as institutions including prestigious ML venues and community organizations are increasingly seeking and
reflexively conducting interdisciplinary study on social aspects of machine learning [7, 8, 13, 40].
(2)We apply our scheme to annotate 100 influential ML research papers and extract their value commit-
ments, including identifying 59 values significant in machine learning research. These papers reflect
and shape the values of the field. Like the annotation scheme, the resulting repository of over 3,500 annotated
sentences is available and is valuable as foundation for further qualitative and quantitative study.
(3)We perform extensive textual analysis to understand dominant values : Performance, Generalization,
Efficiency, Building on past work, and Novelty. Our analysis reveals that while these values may seem on their
face to be purely technical, they are socially and politically charged: we find systematic textual evidence cor-
roborating that these values are currently defined and operationalized in ways that centralize power ,
i.e., disproportionally benefit and empower the already powerful, while neglecting society’s least advantaged.3
(4)We present a quantitative analysis of the affiliations and funding sources of these influential papers.
We find substantive and increasing presence of tech corporations. For example, in 2008/09, 24% of these top
cited papers had corporate affiliated authors, and in 2018/19 this statistic more than doubled, to 55%. Moreover, of
these corporations connected to influential papers, the presence of "big-tech" firms, such as Google and Microsoft,
more than tripled from 21% to 66%.
2 METHODOLOGY
To study the values of ML research, we conduct an in-depth analysis of ML research papers distinctively informative of
these values.4We chose to focus on highly cited papers because they reflect and shape the values of the discipline,
drawing from NeurIPS and ICML because they are the most prestigious of the long-running ML conferences.5Acceptance
to these conferences is a valuable commodity used to evaluate researchers, and submitted papers are typically explicitly
written so as to win the approval of the community, particularly the reviewers who will be drawn from that community.
As such, these papers effectively reveal the values that authors believe are most valued by that community. Citations
indicate amplification by the community, and help to position these papers as influential exemplars of ML research. To
2We include our annotation scheme and all annotations at https://github.com/wagnew3/The-Values-Encoded-in-Machine-Learning-Research with a
CC BY-NC-SA license.
3We understand this to be an interdisciplinary contribution: Scholarship on the values of ML (or alternatives) often faces dismissal based on perceived
distance from prestigious ML research and quantifiable results. Meanwhile, philosophers of science have been working to understand the roles and
political underpinnings of values in science for decades, e.g., in biology and social sciences [ 38,43]. Our paper provides convincing qualitative and
quantitative evidence of ML values and their political underpinnings, bridging ML research and both bodies of work.
4Because the aim of qualitative inquiry is depth of understanding, it is viewed as important to analyze information-rich documents (those that
distinctively reflect and shape the central values of machine learning; for example, textual analysis of influential papers) in lieu of random sampling and
broad analysis (for example, keyword frequencies in a large random sample of ML papers). This is referred to as the importance of purposive sampling
[53].
5At the time of writing, NeurIPS and ICML, along with the newer conference ICLR, comprised the top 3 conferences according to h5-index (and
h5-median) in the AI category on Google Scholar, by a large margin. Citation counts are based on the Semantic Scholar database.
2
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
avoid detecting only short-lived trends, we drew papers from two recent years (2018/196) and from ten years earlier
(2008/09). We focused on conference papers because they tend to follow a standard format and allow limited space,
meaning that researchers must make hard choices about what to emphasize. Collectively, an interdisciplinary team of
researchers analyzed the 100 most highly cited papers from NeurIPS and ICML, from the years 2008, 2009, 2018, and
2019, annotating over 3,500 sentences drawn from them. In the context of expert content analysis, this constitutes a
large scale annotation which allows us to meaningfully comment on central values.
Our team constructed an annotation scheme and applied it to manually annotate each paper, examining the abstract,
introduction, discussion, and conclusion: (1) We examined the chain of reasoning by which each paper justified its
contributions, which we call the justificatory chain , categorizing the extent to which papers used technical or societal
problems to justify or motivate their contributions (Table 1).7,8(2) We carefully read each sentence of these sections
line-by-line, inductively annotating any and all values uplifted by the sentence (Figure 1). We use a conceptualization of
"value" that is widespread in philosophy of science in theorizing about values in sciences: a "value" of an entity is a
property that is considered desirable for that kind of entity, e.g. regarded as a desirable attribute for machine learning
research.9(3) We categorized the extent to which the paper included a discussion of potential negative impacts (Table 2).8
(4) We documented and categorized the author affiliations and stated funding sources. In this paper, we provide complete
annotations, quantize the annotations to quantify and present dominant patterns, and present randomly sampled
excerpts and key themes in how these values become socially loaded.
To perform the line-by-line analysis and annotate the uplifted values (Figure 1), we used a hybrid inductive-deductive
content analysis methodology and followed best practices [ 9,30,37,45]: (i) We began with several values of interest
based on prior literature, specifically seven ethical principles and user rights [ 6,23,32]. (ii) We randomly sampled
a subset of 10 papers for initial annotation, reading sentence by sentence, deductively annotating for the values of
interest and inductively adding new values as they emerged, by discussion until perfect consensus. The deductive
component ensures we note and can speak to values of interest, and the inductive component enables discovery and
impedes findings limited by bias or preconception by requiring textual grounding and focusing on emergent values
[9,37]. (iii) We annotated the full set of papers sentence by sentence. We followed the constant comparative method, in
which we continually compared each text unit to the annotations and values list thus far, annotated for the values in the
values list, held regular discussions, and we individually nominated and decided by consensus when sentences required
inductively adding emergent values to the values list [ 24]. We used a number of established strategies in service of
consistency which we discuss below. Following qualitative research best practices, we identified by consensus a small
number of values we found were used synonymously or closely related and combined these categories, listing all merges
in Appendix C.10(iv) In this paper, for each top value, we present randomly selected quotations of the value, richly
describe the meaning of the value in context, present key themes in how the value is operationalized and becomes
socially loaded, and illustrate its contingency by comparing to alternative values in the literature that might have been
or might be valued instead.
6At the time of beginning annotation, 2018 and 2019 were the two most recent years available.
7In qualitative research, the term ‘coding’ is used to denote deductively categorizing text into selected categories as well as inductively annotating text
with emergent categories. To avoid overloading computer science ‘coding’, we use the terms categorizing and annotating throughout this paper.
8We found the first three categories of this scheme were generally sufficient for our analysis. In service of rich understanding, we included the subtler
fourth category. As much as possible, we steel-manned discussions: regardless of whether we were convinced or intrigued by a discussion, if it presented
the level of detail typical when discussing projects’ technical implications, then it was assigned category four.
9For example, speed can be described as valuable in an antelope [ 44]. Well-know scientific values include accuracy, consistency, scope, simplicity, and
fruitfulness [38]. See [43] for a critical discussion of socially-laden aspects of these values in science.
10For example, in Section 4.6, we discuss themes cutting across efficiency, sometimes referenced in the abstract and sometimes indicated by uplifting
data efficiency, energy efficiency, fast, label efficiency, low cost, memory efficiency, or reduced training time.
3
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
We adhere to a number of best practices to establish reliability: We practice prolonged engagement, conducting
long-term orientation to and analysis of data over more than a year (in lieu of short-term analysis that is dominated
by preconceptions) [ 41]; We triangulate across researchers (six researchers) and points in time (four years) and place
(two conferences) [ 18,54]; We recode data coded early in the process [ 36]; We transparently publish the complete
annotation scheme and all annotations [ 49]; We conduct negative case analysis, for example, drawing out and discussing
papers with unusually strong connections to societal needs [ 41]; and we include a reflexivity statement in Appendix D
describing our team in greater detail, striving to highlight relevant personal and disciplinary viewpoints.
The composition of our team confers additional validity to our work. We are a multi-racial, multi-gender team
working closely, including undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate researchers engaged with machine learning,
NLP, robotics, cognitive science, critical theory, community organizing, and philosophy. This team captures several
advantages: the nature of this team minimizes personal and intra-disciplinary biases, affords the unique combination
of expertise required to read the values in complex ML papers, allows meaningful engagement with relevant work in
other fields, and enabled best practices including continually clarifying the procedure, ensuring agreement, vetting
consistency, reannotating, and discussing themes [ 37]. Across the annotating team, we found that annotators were
able to make somewhat different and complementary inductive paper-level observations, while obtaining near or
perfect consensus on corpus-level findings. To assess the consistency of paper-level annotations, 40% of the papers were
double-annotated by paired annotators. During the inductive-deductive process of annotating sentences with values
(ultimately annotating each sentence for the presence of 75 values), paired annotators agreed 87.0% of the time, and
obtained a fuzzy Fleiss’ kappa [ 35] on values per paper of 0.45, indicating moderate agreement. During the deductive
process of categorizing the extent to which a paper included societal justification and negative potential impacts (ordinal
categorization according to the schema in Table 1 and Table 2), paired annotators obtained substantial agreement,
indicated by Fleiss’ weighted kappa ( 𝜅=.60,𝜅=.79). Finally, at the corpus level we found substantial agreement: annotators
identified the list of emergent values by perfect consensus, unanimously finding these values to be present in the papers.
Across annotators, there was substantial agreement on the relative prevalence (ranking) of the values, indicated by
Kendall’s W[34] (W=.80), and we identified by consensus the five most dominant values, which we discuss in detail.
Manual analysis is necessary at all steps of the method (i-iv). Manual analysis is required for the central task of reading
the papers and inductively identifying previously unobserved values. Additionally, once values have been established,
we find manual analysis continues to be necessary for annotation. We find that many values are expressed in ways that
are subtle, varied, or rely on contextual knowledge. We find current automated methods for labeling including keyword
searches and basic classifiers miss new values, annotate poorly relative to manual annotation, and systematically skew
the results towards values which are easy to identify, while missing or mischaracterizing values which are exhibited in
more nuanced ways.11Accordingly, we find our use of qualitative methodology is indispensable. Reading all papers is
key for contributing the textual analysis as well, as doing so includes developing a subtle understanding of how the
values function in the text and understanding of taken for granted assumptions underlying the values.
In the context of an interdisciplinary readership, including ML and other STEM disciplines that foreground quantita-
tive methodology, it is both a unique contribution and a limitation that this paper centers qualitative methodology. Ours
is a significant and timely methodological contribution as there is rising interest in qualitatively studying the social
values being encoded in ML, including reflexively by ML researchers [ 7,8,13,40]. Simultaneously, the use of qualitative
11In Appendix E, we implement automatic annotation and empirically demonstrate these failure modes.
4
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
Table 1. Annotations of justificatory chain.
Justificatory Chain % of Papers
Does not mention societal need 68%
States but does not justify how it connects to a societal need 17%
States and somewhat justifies how it connects to a societal need 11%
States and rigorously justifies how it connects to a a societal need 4%
methodology in quantitative-leaning contexts could lead to misinterpretations. Human beliefs are complex and multi-
tudinous, and it is well-established that when qualitative-leaning methodology is presented in quantitative-leaning
contexts, it is possible for study of imprecise subject matter to be misinterpreted as imprecise study of subjects [11].
In brief, whereas quantitative analysis typically favors large random sampling and strict, statistical evidence in
service of generalization of findings, qualitative analysis typically favors purposive sampling from information-rich
context and richly descriptive evidence in service of depth of understanding [ 11,45]. For both our final list of values
and specific annotation of individual sentences, different researchers might make somewhat different choices. However,
given the overwhelming presence of certain values, the high agreement rate among annotators, and the similarity
of observations made by our team, we believe other researchers following a similar approach would reach similar
conclusions about what values are most frequently uplifted. Also, we cannot claim to have identified every relevant
value in ML. Rather, we present a collection of such values; and by including important ethical values identified by past
work, and specifically looking for these, we can confidently assert their relative absence in this set of papers. Finally,
qualitative analysis is an effort to understand situations in their uniqueness, i.e., in this set of papers. Future work may
determine whether and how to form conclusions about stratifications (e.g. between chosen years or conferences) and
whether and how to use this qualitative analysis to construct new quantitative instruments to ascertain generalization
(e.g. across more years or conferences) [21, 53]. Our study contributes unprecedent data and textual analysis and lays
the groundwork for this future work.
3 QUANTITATIVE SUMMARY
In Figure 1, we plot the prevalence of values in 100 annotated papers. The top values are: performance (96% of papers),
generalization (89%), building on past work (88%), quantitative evidence (85%), efficiency (84%), and novelty (77%).
Values related to user rights and stated in ethical principles appeared very rarely if at all: none of the papers mentioned
autonomy, justice, or respect for persons. In Table 1, we show the distribution of justification scores. Most papers only
justify how they achieve their internal, technical goal; 68% make no mention of societal need or impact, and only 4%
make a rigorous attempt to present links connecting their research to societal needs. In Table 2, we show the distribution
of negative impact discussion scores. One annotated paper included a discussion of negative impacts and a second
mentioned the possibility of negative impacts. 98% of papers contained no reference to potential negative impacts. In
Figure 3, we show stated connections (funding ties and author affiliations) to institutions. Comparing papers written in
2008/2009 to those written in 2018/2019, ties to corporations nearly doubled to 79% of all annotated papers, ties to big
tech more than tripled, to 66%, while ties to universities declined to 81%, putting the presence of corporations nearly on
par with universities. In the next section, we present extensive qualitative examples and analysis of our findings.
5
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
Fig. 1. Proportion of annotated papers that uplift each value.
6
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
Table 2. Annotations of discussed negative potential.
Discussion of Negative Potential % of Papers
Does not mention negative potential 98%
Mentions but does not discuss negative potential 1%
Discusses negative potential 1%
Deepens our understanding of negative potential 0%
4 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS
4.1 Justifications
We find papers typically justify their choice of project by contextualizing it within a broader goal and giving a chain of
justification from the broader goal to the particular project pursued in the paper. These justifications reveal priorities:
Papers typically motivate their projects by appealing to the needs of the ML research community and
rarely mention potential societal benefits. Research-driven needs of the ML community include researcher un-
derstanding (e.g., understanding the effect of pre-training on performance/robustness, theoretically understanding
multi-layer networks) as well as more practical research problems (e.g., improving efficiency of models for large datasets,
creating a new benchmark for NLP tasks).
Even when societal needs are mentioned as part of the justification of the project, the connection is loose.
Some papers do appeal to needs of broader society, such as building models with realistic assumptions, catering to more
languages, or “understanding the world”. Yet almost no papers explain how their project promotes a social need they
identify by giving the kind of rigorous justification that is typically expected of and given for technical contributions.
The cursory nature of the connection between societal needs and the content of the paper also manifests
in the fact that the societal needs, or the applicability to the real world, is often only discussed in the
beginning of the papers. From papers that mention applicability to the real world, the vast majority of mentions are
in the Introduction section, and applicability is rarely engaged with afterwards. Papers tend to introduce the problem
as useful for applications in object detection or text classification, for example, but rarely justify why an application is
worth contributing to, or revisit how they particularly contribute to an application as their result.
4.2 Discussion of Negative Potential
Although a plethora of work exists on sources of harm that can arise in relation to ML research [ 7,15,25,28,60], we
observe that these discussions are ignored in these influential conference publications.
It is extremely rare for papers to mention negative potential at all. Just as the goals of the papers are largely
inward-looking, prioritizing the needs of the ML research community, these papers fail to acknowledge both broader
societal needs and societal impacts. This norm is taken for granted: none of these papers offer any explanation for why
they cannot speak to negative impacts. These observations correspond to a larger trend in the ML research community
of neglecting to discuss aspects of the work that are not strictly positive.
The lack of discussion of potential harms is especially striking for papers which deal with contentious
application areas , such as surveillance and misinformation. These include papers, for example, that advance identifi-
cation of people in images, face-swapping, and video synthesis. These papers contain no mention of the well-studied
negative potential of facial surveillance, DeepFakes, or misleading videos.
7
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
Among the two papers that do mention negative potential, the discussions were mostly abstract and
hypothetical , rather than grounded in the concrete negative potential of their specific contributions. For example,
authors may acknowledge "possible unwanted social biases" when applying models to a real-world setting, without
commenting on let alone assessing the social biases encoded in the authors’ proposed model.
4.3 Stated values
The dominant values that emerged from the annotated corpus are: Performance, Generalization, Building on past work,
Quantitative evidence, Efficiency, and Novelty. These are often portrayed as innate and purely technical. However,
the following analysis of these values shows how they can become politically loaded in the process of prioritizing
and operationalizing them: sensitivity to the way that they are operationalized, and to the fact that they are uplifted
at all, reveals value-laden assumptions that are often taken for granted. To provide a sense of what the values look
like in context, Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6 present randomly selected examples of sentences annotated with the values of
Performance, Generalization, Efficiency, Building on past work, and Novelty respectively. Extensive additional examples
can be found in Appendix H.12For each of these prominent values, we quantify its dominance, identify constituent
values that contribute to this value, challenge a conception of the value as politically neutral, identify key themes in
how the value is socialy loaded, and we cite alternatives to its dominant conceptualization that may be equally or more
valid, interesting, or socially beneficial. When values seem neutral or innate, we have encouraged ourselves, and now
encourage the reader, to remember that values once held to be intrinsic, obvious, or definitional have in many cases
been found harmful and transformed over time and purportedly neutral values warrant careful consideration.
4.4 Performance
Emphasizing performance is the most common way by which papers attempt to communicate their contributions, by
showing a specific, quantitative, improvement over past work, according to some metric on a new or established dataset.
For some reviewers, obtaining better performance than any other system—a “state-of-the-art” (SOTA) result—is seen as
a noteworthy, or even necessary, contribution [58].
Despite acknowledged issues with this kind of evaluation (including the artificiality of many datasets, and the
privileging of “tricks” over insight; 22,42), performance is typically presented as intrinsic to the field. Frequently, the
value of Performance is indicated by specifically uplifting accuracy or state of the art results, which are presented as
similarly intrinsic. However, models are not simply "well-performing" or "accurate" in the abstract but always in relation
to and as quantified by some metric on some dataset . Examining definition and operationalization of performance
values, we identify three key social aspects.
✦Performance values are consistently and without discussion operationalized as correctness averaged
across individual predictions, giving equal weight to each instance. However, choosing equal weights when
averaging is a value-laden move which might deprioritize those underrepresentated in the data or the world, as well as
societal and evaluee needs and preferences regarding inclusion. Extensive research in ML fairness and related fields has
considered alternatives, but we found no such discussions among the influential papers we examined.
✦Datasets are typically preestablished, large corpora with discrete "ground truth" labels. They are often
driven purely by past work, so as to demonstrate improvement over a previous baseline (see also §4.7). Another common
12To avoid the impression that we are mainly interested in drawing attention to specific papers, we omit attribution for individual examples, but
include a list of all annotated papers in Appendix I. Note that most sentences are annotated with multiple values; for example, there can be overlap in
sentences annotated with performance and sentences annotated with generalization .
8
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
Table 3. Random examples of performance , the most common emergent value.
"Our model significantly outperforms SVM’s, and it also outperforms convolutional neural nets when given additional unlabeled
data produced by small translations of the training images."
"We show in simulations on synthetic examples and on the IEDB MHC-I binding dataset, that our approach outperforms
well-known convex methods for multi-task learning, as well as related non-convex methods dedicated to the same problem."
"Furthermore, the learning accuracy and performance of our LGP approach will be compared with other important standard
methods in Section 4, e.g., LWPR [8], standard GPR [1], sparse online Gaussian process regression (OGP) [5] and 𝜐-support
vector regression ( 𝜐-SVR) [11], respectively."
"In addition to having theoretically sound grounds, the proposed method also outperformed state-of-the-art methods in two
experiments with real data."
"We prove that unlabeled data bridges this gap: a simple semisupervised learning procedure (self-training) achieves high robust
accuracy using the same number of labels required for achieving high standard accuracy."
"Experiments show that PointCNN achieves on par or better performance than state-of-the-art methods on multiple challenging
benchmark datasets and tasks."
"Despite its impressive empirical performance, NAS is computationally expensive and time consuming, e.g. Zoph et al. (2018) use
450 GPUs for 3-4 days (i.e. 32,400-43,200 GPU hours)."
"However, it is worth examining why this combination of priors results in superior performance."
"In comparisons with a number of prior HRL methods, we find that our approach substantially outperforms previous state-of-the-
art techniques."
"Our proposed method addresses these issues, and greatly outperforms the current state of the art."
justification for using a certain dataset is claimed applicability to the "real world". Assumptions about how to characterize
the "real world" are value-laden. One preestablished and typically perpetuated assumption is the availability of very
large datasets. However, presupposing the availability of large datasets is non-neutral and power centralizing because
it encodes favoritism to those with resources to obtain and process them [ 20]. Additionally, the welfare, consent, or
awareness of the datafied subjects whose images end up in a large scale image dataset, for example, are not considered
in the annotated papers. Further overlooked assumptions include that the real world is binary or discrete, and that
datasets come with a predefined ground-truth label for each example, presuming that a true label always exists "out
there" independent of those carving it out, defining and labelling it. This contrasts against marginalized scholars’ calls
for ML models that allow for non-binaries, plural truths, contextual truths, and many ways of being [16, 26, 39].
✦The prioritization of performance values is so entrenched in the field that generic success terms, such
as "success", "progress", or "improvement" are used as synonyms for performance and accuracy. However,
one might alternatively invoke generic success to mean increasingly safe, consensual, or participatory ML that reckons
with impacted communities and the environment. In fact, "performance" itself is a general success term that could have
been associated with properties other than accuracy and SOTA.
4.5 Generalization
We observe that a common way of appraising the merits of one’s work is to claim that it generalizes well. Notably,
generalization is understood in terms of the dominant value, performance: a model is perceived as generalizing when
it achieves good performance on a range of samples, datasets, domains, tasks, or applications. In fact, the value of
generalization is sometimes indicated by referencing generalization in the abstract and other times indicated by
9
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
Table 4. Random examples of generalization , the second most common emergent value.
"The range of applications that come with generative models are vast, where audio synthesis [55] and semi-supervised classification
[38, 31, 44] are examples hereof."
"Furthermore, the infinite limit could conceivably make sense in deep learning, since over-parametrization seems to help
optimization a lot and doesn’t hurt generalization much [Zhang et al., 2017]: deep neural nets with millions of parameters work
well even for datasets with 50k training examples."
"Combining the optimization and generalization results, we uncover a broad class of learnable functions, including linear
functions, two-layer neural networks with polynomial activation 𝜙(𝑧)=𝑧2𝑙or cosine activation, etc."
"We can apply the proposed method to solve regularized least square problems, which have the loss function (1−𝑦𝑖𝜔𝑇𝑥𝑖)2in
(1)."
"The result is a generalized deflation procedure that typically outperforms more standard techniques on real-world datasets."
"Our proposed invariance measure is broadly applicable to evaluating many deep learning algorithms for many tasks, but the
present paper will focus on two different algorithms applied to computer vision."
"We show how both multitask learning and semi-supervised learning improve the generalization of the shared tasks, resulting in
state-of-the-art performance."
"We have also demonstrated that the proposed model is able to generalize much better than LDA in terms of both the log-probability
on held-out documents and the retrieval accuracy."
"We define a rather general convolutional network architecture and describe its application to many well known NLP tasks
including part-of-speech tagging, chunking, named-entity recognition, learning a language modeland the task of semantic
role-labeling"
"We demonstrate our algorithm on multiple datasets and show that it outperforms relevant baselines."
specifically uplifting values such as Minimal discrepancy between train/test samples or Flexibility/extensibility, e.g., to
other tasks. We identify three key socially loaded aspects of how generalization is defined and operationalized.
✦Only certain datasets, domains, or applications are valued as indicators of model generalization. Typi-
cally, a paper shows that a model generalizes by showing that it performs well on multiple tasks or datasets. However,
like the tasks and datasets indicating performance, the choice of particular tasks and datasets indicating generalization
is rarely justified; the choice of tasks can often seem arbitrary, and authors often claim generalization while rarely
presenting discussion or analysis indicating their results will generalize outside the carefully selected datasets, domains
or applications, or to more realistic settings, or help to directly address societal needs.
✦Prizing generalization leads institutions to harvest datasets from various domains, and to treat these
as the only datasets that matter in the space of problems . Papers prizing generalization implicitly and sometimes
explicitly prioritize reducing every scenario top-down to a common set of representations or affordances, rather
than treating each setting as meaningfully unique and potentially motivating technologies or lack thereof that are
fundamentally different from the current standard. Despite vague associations between generalization and accessible
technology for diverse peoples, in practice work on generalization frequently targets one model to rule them all,
denigrating diverse access needs. Critical scholars have advocated for valuing context , which may stand opposed to
striving for generalization [ 19]. Others have argued that this kind of totalizing lens (in which model developers have
unlimited power to determine how the world is represented) leads to representational harms, due to applying a single
representational framework to everything [1, 17].
✦The belief that generalization is possible assumes new data will be or should be treated similarly to
previously seen data. When used in the context of ML, the assumption that the future resembles the past is often
10
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
Table 5. Random examples of efficiency , the fifth most common emergent value.
"Our model allows for controllable yet efficient generation of an entire news article – not just the body, but also the title, news
source, publication date, and author list."
"We show that Bayesian PMF models can be efficiently trained using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods by applying them to
the Netflix dataset, which consists of over 100 million movie ratings."
"In particular, our EfficientNet-B7 surpasses the best existing GPipe accuracy (Huang et al., 2018), but using 8.4x fewer parameters
and running 6.1x faster on inference."
"Our method improves over both online and batch methods and learns faster on a dozen NLP datasets."
“We describe efficient algorithms for projecting a vector onto the ℓ1-ball.”
"Approximation of this prior structure through simple, efficient hyperparameter optimization steps is sufficient to achieve these
performance gains."
"We have developed a new distributed agent IMPALA (Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Architecture) that not only uses
resources more efficiently in single-machine training but also scales to thousands of machines without sacrificing data efficiency
or resource utilisation."
"In this paper we propose a simple and efficient algorithm SVP (Singular Value Projection) based on the projected gradient
algorithm"
"We give an exact and efficient dynamic programming algorithm to compute CNTKs for ReLU activation."
"In contrast, our proposed algorithm has strong bounds, requires no extra work for enforcing positive definiteness, and can be
implemented efficiently."
problematic as past societal stereotypes and injustice can be encoded in the process [ 51]. Furthermore, to the extent
that predictions are performative [ 55], especially predictions that are enacted, those ML models which are deployed to
the world will contribute to shaping social patterns. None of the annotated papers attempt to counteract this quality or
acknowledge its presence.
4.6 Efficiency
In the annotated papers, we find that saying that a model is efficient typically indicates the model uses less of some
resource, e.g., data efficiency, energy efficiency, label efficiency, memory efficiency, being low cost, fast, or having
reduced training time. We find that the definition and operationalization of efficiency encodes key social priorities,
namely which kind of efficiency matters andto what end .
✦Efficiency is commonly referenced to indicate the ability to scale up, not to save resources. For example,
a more efficient inference method allows you to do inference in much larger models or on larger datasets, using the
same amount of resources used previously, or more. This mirrors the classic Jevon’s paradox: greater resource efficiency
often leads to overall greater utilization of that resource. This is reflected in our value annotations, where 84% of papers
mention valuing efficiency, but only 15% of those value requiring few resources . When referencing the consequences of
efficiency, many papers present evidence that efficiency enables scaling up, while none of the papers present evidence
that efficiency can facilitate work by low-resource communities or can lessen resource extraction – e.g. less hardware or
data harvesting or lower carbon emissions. In this way, valuing efficiency facilitates and encourages the most powerful
actors to scale up their computation to ever higher orders of magnitude, making their models even less accessible to
those without resources to use them and decreasing the ability to compete with them. Alternative usages of efficiency
could encode accessibility instead of scalability, aiming to create more equitable conditions.
11
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
Table 6. Random examples of building on past work andnovelty , the third and sixth most common emergent values, respectively.
Building on past work
"Recent work points towards sample complexity as a possible reason for the small gains in robustness: Schmidt et al. [41] show
that in a simple model, learning a classifier with non-trivial adversarially robust accuracy requires substantially more samples
than achieving good ‘standard’ accuracy."
"Experiments indicate that our method is much faster than state of the art solvers such as Pegasos, TRON, SVMperf, and a recent
primal coordinate descent implementation."
"There is a large literature on GP (response surface) optimization."
"In a recent breakthrough, Recht et al. [24] gave the first nontrivial results for the problem obtaining guaranteed rank minimization
for affine transformations A that satisfy a restricted isometry property (RIP)."
"In this paper, we combine the basic idea behind both approaches, i.e., LWPR and GPR, attempting to get as close as possible to
the speed of local learning while having a comparable accuracy to Gaussian process regression"
Novelty
"In this paper, we propose a video-to-video synthesis approach under the generative adversarial learning framework."
"Third, we propose a novel method for the listwise approach, which we call ListMLE."
"The distinguishing feature of our work is the use of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods for approximate inference in
this model."
"To our knowledge, this is the first attack algorithm proposed for this threat model."
"Here, we focus on a different type of structure, namely output sparsity, which is not addressed in previous work."
4.7 Novelty and Building on Past Work
Most authors devote space in the introduction to positioning their paper in relation to past work, and describing what is
novel. Building on past work is sometimes referenced broadly and other times is indicated more specifically as building
on classic work or building on recent work. In general, mentioning past work serves to signal awareness of related
publications, to establish the new work as relevant to the community, and to provide the basis upon which to make
claims about what is new. Novelty is sometimes suggested implicitly (e.g., "we develop" or "we propose"), but frequently
it is emphasized explicitly (e.g. "a new algorithm" or "a novel approach"). The emphasis on novelty is common across
many academic fields [ 61,62]. The combined focus on novelty and building on past work establishes a continuity of
ideas, and might be expected to contribute to the self-correcting nature of science [ 46]. However, this is not always the
case [ 31] and attention to the ways novelty and building on past work are defined and implemented reveals two key
social commitments.
✦Technical novelty is most highly valued. The highly-cited papers we examined mostly tend to emphasize the
novelty of their proposed method or of their theoretical result. Very few uplifted their paper on the basis of applying
an existing method to a novel domain, or for providing a novel philosophical argument or synthesis. We find a clear
emphasis on technical novelty, rather than critique of past work, or demonstration of measurable progress on societal
problems, as has previously been observed [63].
✦Although introductions sometimes point out limitations of past work so as to further emphasize the
contributions of their own paper, they are rarely explicitly critical of other papers in terms of datasets,
methods, or goals. Indeed, papers uncritically reuse the same datasets for years or decades to benchmark their
algorithms, even if those datasets fail to represent more realistic contexts in which their algorithms will be used [ 7].
12
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
Fig. 2. Corporate and Big Tech author affiliations.
The percent of papers with Big Tech author affiliations increased from 13% in 2008/09 to 47% in 2018/19.
Novelty is denied to work that critiques or rectifies socially harmful aspects of existing datasets and goals, and this
occurs in tandem with strong pressure to benchmark on them and thereby perpetuate their use, enforcing a conservative
bent to ML research.
5 CORPORATE AFFILIATIONS AND FUNDING
Quantitative summary. Our analysis shows substantive and increasing corporate presence in the most highly-cited
papers. In 2008/09, 24% of the top cited papers had corporate affiliated authors , and in 2018/19 this statistic more than
doubled to 55%. Furthermore, we also find a much greater concentration of a few large tech firms, such as Google and
Microsoft, with the presence of these "big tech" firms (as identified in [ 4]) increasing nearly fourfold, from 13% to 47%
(Figure 2). The fraction of the annotated papers with corporate ties by corporate affiliated authors or corporate funding
dramatically increased from 45% in 2008/09 to 79% in 2018/19 (Figure 3). These findings are consistent with contemporary
work indicating a pronounced corporate presence in ML research: in an automated analysis of peer-reviewed papers
from 57 major computer science conferences, Ahmed and Wahed [ 4] show that the share of papers with corporate
affiliated authors increased from 10% in 2005 for both ICML and NeurIPS to 30% and 35% respectively in 2019. Our
analysis shows that corporate presence is even more pronounced in those papers from ICML and NeurIPS that end up
receiving the most citations. In addition, we found paramount domination of elite universities in our analysis as shown
in Figure 3. Of the total papers with university affiliations, we found 80% were from elite universities (defined as the top
50 universities by QS World University Rankings, following past work [4]).
Analysis. The influence of powerful players in ML research is consistent with field-wide value commitments that
centralize power. Others have argued for causal connections. For example, Abdalla and Abdalla [ 2] argue that big
tech sway and influence academic and public discourse using strategies which closely resemble strategies used by Big
Tabacco. Moreover, examining the prevalent values of big tech, critiques have repeatedly pointed out that objectives
such as efficiency, scale, and wealth accumulation [ 27,51,52] drive the industry at large, often at the expense of
individuals rights, respect for persons, consideration of negative impacts, beneficence, and justice. Thus, the top stated
values of ML that we presented in this paper such as performance, generalization, and efficiency may not only enable
and facilitate the realization of big tech’s objectives, but also suppress values such as beneficence, justice, and inclusion.
A "state-of-the-art" large image dataset, for example, is instrumental for large scale models, further benefiting ML
researchers and big tech in possession of huge computing power. In the current climate — where values such as accuracy,
efficiency, and scale, as currently defined, are a priority, and there is a pattern of centralization of power — user safety,
informed consent, or participation may be perceived as costly and time consuming, evading social needs.
13
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
Fig. 3. Affiliations and funding ties.
From 2008/09 to 2018/19, the percent of papers tied to nonprofits, research institutes, and tech companies increased substantially.
Most significantly, ties to Big Tech increased threefold and overall ties to tech companies increased to 79%.
Non-N.A. Universities are those outside the U.S. and Canada.
6 DISCUSSION AND RELATED WORK
There is a foundational understanding in Science, Technology, and Society Studies (STS), Critical Theory, and Philosophy
of Science that science and technologies are inherently value-laden, and these values are encoded in technological
artifacts, many times in contrast to a field’s formal research criteria, espoused consequences, or ethics guidelines
[10,14,66]. There is a long tradition of exposing and critiquing such values in technology and computer science. For
example, Winner [66] introduced several ways technology can encode political values. This work is closely related to
Rogaway [ 57], who notes that cryptography has political and moral dimensions and argues for a cryptography that
better addresses societal needs.
Our paper extends these critiques to the field of ML. It is a part of a rich space of interdisciplinary critiques and
alternative lenses used to examine the field. Works such as [ 12,47] critique AI, ML, and data using a decolonial lens,
noting how these technologies replicate colonial power relationships and values, and propose decolonial values and
methods. Others [ 10,19,50] examine technology and data science from an anti-racist and intersectional feminist lens,
discussing how our infrastructure has largely been built by and for white men; D’Ignazio and Klein [19] present a set
of alternative principles and methodologies for an intersectional feminist data science. Similarly, Kalluri [ 33] denotes
that the core values of ML are closely aligned with the values of the most privileged and outlines a vision where
ML models are used to shift power from the most to the least powerful. Dotan and Milli [ 20] argue that the rise of
deep learning is value-laden, promoting the centralization of power among other political values. Many researchers,
as well as organizations such as Data for Black Lives, the Algorithmic Justice League, Our Data Bodies, the Radical
AI Network, Indigenous AI, Black in AI, and Queer in AI, explicitly work on continuing to uncover particular ways
technology in general and ML in particular can encode and amplify racist, sexist, queerphobic, transphobic, and
otherwise marginalizing values, while simultaneously working to actualize alternatives [15, 56].
14
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
There has been considerable growth over the past few years in institutional, academic, and grassroots interest in the
societal impacts of ML, as reflected in the rise of relevant grassroots and non-profit organizations, the organizing of new
workshops, the emergence of new conferences such as FAccT, and changes to community norms, such as the required
broader impacts statements at NeurIPS. We present this paper in part to make visible the present state of the field and
to demonstrate its contingent nature; it could be otherwise. For individuals, communities, and institutions wading
through difficult-to-pin-down values of the field, as well as those striving toward alternative values, it is advantageous
to have a characterization of the way the field is now — to serve as both a confirmation and a map for understanding,
shaping, dismantling, or transforming what is, and for articulating and bringing about alternative visions.
7 CONCLUSION
In this study, we find robust evidence against the vague conceptualization of the discipline of ML as value-neutral. Instead,
we investigate the ways that the discipline of ML is inherently value-laden. Our analysis of highly influential papers in
the discipline finds that they not only favor the needs of research communities and large firms over broader social
needs, but also that they take this favoritism for granted, not acknowledging critiques or alternatives. The favoritism
manifests in the choice of projects, the lack of consideration of potential negative impacts, and the prioritization and
operationalization of values such as performance, generalization, efficiency, and novelty. These values are operationalized
in ways that disfavor societal needs. Moreover, we uncover an overwhelming and increasing presence of big tech
and elite universities in these highly cited papers, which is consistent with a system of power-centralizing value-
commitments. The upshot is that the discipline of ML is not value-neutral. We present extensive quantitative and
qualitative evidence that it is socially and politically loaded, frequently neglecting societal needs and harms, while
prioritizing and promoting the concentration of resources, tools, knowledge, and power in the hands of already powerful
actors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Luke Stark, Dan Jurafsky, and Sarah K. Dreier for helpful feedback on this work. We owe
gratitude and accountability to the long history of work exposing how technology shifts power, work primarily done by
communities at the margins. Abeba Birhane was supported in part by Science Foundation Ireland grant 13/RC/2094_2.
Pratyusha Kalluri was supported in part by the Open Phil AI Fellowship. Dallas Card was supported in part by the
Stanford Data Science Institute. William Agnew was supported by an NDSEG Fellowship.
REFERENCES
[1]Mohsen Abbasi, Sorelle A. Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2019. Fairness in Representation: Quantifying Stereotyping
as a Representational Harm. In Proceedings of the 2019 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining .
[2]Mohamed Abdalla and Moustafa Abdalla. 2021. The Grey Hoodie Project: Big Tobacco, Big Tech, and the Threat on Academic Integrity. In Proceedings
of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society . https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462563
[3]Grace Abuhamad and Claudel Rheault. 2020. Like a Researcher Stating Broader Impact For the Very First Time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13032
(2020).
[4]Nur Ahmed and Muntasir Wahed. 2020. The De-democratization of AI: Deep Learning and the Compute Divide in Artificial Intelligence Research.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15581 (2020).
[5]Waleed Ammar, Dirk Groeneveld, Chandra Bhagavatula, Iz Beltagy, Miles Crawford, Doug Downey, Jason Dunkelberger, Ahmed Elgohary, Sergey
Feldman, Vu Ha, Rodney Kinney, Sebastian Kohlmeier, Kyle Lo, Tyler Murray, Hsu-Han Ooi, Matthew Peters, Joanna Power, Sam Skjonsberg,
Lucy Lu Wang, Chris Wilhelm, Zheng Yuan, Madeleine van Zuylen, and Oren Etzioni. 2018. Construction of the Literature Graph in Semantic
Scholar. In Proceedings of NAACL . https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09e3cf5704bcb16e6657f6ceed70e93373a54618
15
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
[6]Michael Bailey, David Dittrich, Erin Kenneally, and Doug Maughan. 2012. The Menlo Report: Ethical Principles Guiding Information and Communication
Technology Research . Technical Report. U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
[7]Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language
Models Be Too Big? Proceedings of FAccT (2021).
[8]Samy Bengio and Deborah Raji. 2021. A Retrospective on the NeurIPS 2021 Ethics Review Process. https://blog.neurips.cc/2021/12/03/a-
retrospective-on-the-neurips-2021-ethics-review-process/
[9] Mariette Bengtsson. 2016. How to plan and perform a qualitative study using content analysis. NursingPlus Open 2 (2016), 8–14.
[10] Ruha Benjamin. 2019. Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim Code . Wiley.
[11] Bruce L. Berg and Howard Lune. 2017. Qualitative research methods for the social sciences (ninth edition ed.). Pearson.
[12] Abeba Birhane. 2020. Algorithmic Colonization of Africa. SCRIPTed 17, 2 (2020).
[13] Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (Technology) is Power: A Critical Survey of “Bias” in NLP. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.485
[14] Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sorting things out: Classification and its consequences . MIT press.
[15] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. 2018. Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency .
[16] Sasha Costanza-Chock. 2018. Design Justice, AI, and Escape from the Matrix of Domination. Journal of Design and Science (2018).
[17] Kate Crawford. 2017. The Trouble with Bias. (2017). NeurIPS Keynote.
[18] Norman K Denzin. 2017. Sociological methods: a sourcebook . McGraw-Hill.
[19] Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F Klein. 2020. Data Feminism . MIT Press.
[20] Ravit Dotan and Smitha Milli. 2019. Value-Laden Disciplinary Shifts in Machine Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01172 (2019).
[21] Louise Doyle, Catherine McCabe, Brian Keogh, Annemarie Brady, and Margaret McCann. 2020. An overview of the qualitative descriptive design
within nursing research. Journal of Research in Nursing 25, 5 (Aug 2020), 443–455. https://doi.org/10.1177/1744987119880234
[22] Kawin Ethayarajh and Dan Jurafsky. 2020. Utility is in the Eye of the User: A Critique of NLP Leaderboards. In Proceedings of EMNLP .
[23] Luciano Floridi and Josh Cowls. 2019. A Unified Framework of Five Principles for AI in Society. Harvard Data Science Review 1, 1 (2019).
[24] Barney G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss. 1999. The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for grounded research . Aldine de Gruyter.
[25] Ben Green. 2019. ‘Good’ isn’t Good Enough. In NeurIPS Joint Workshop on AI for Social Good .
[26] Foad Hamidi, Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, and Stacy M. Branham. 2018. Gender Recognition or Gender Reductionism? The Social Implications of
Embedded Gender Recognition Systems. In Proceedings CHI .
[27] Alex Hanna and Tina M. Park. 2020. Against Scale: Provocations and Resistances to Scale Thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08850 (2020).
[28] Kashmir Hill. 2020. Wrongfully Accused by an Algorithm. The New York Times (2020). https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/24/technology/facial-
recognition-arrest.html
[29] Kenneth Holstein, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hal Daumé III, Miro Dudik, and Hanna Wallach. 2019. Improving Fairness in Machine Learning
Systems: What Do Industry Practitioners Need?. In Proceedings of CHI .
[30] Hsiu-Fang Hsieh and Sarah E. Shannon. 2005. Three Approaches to Qualitative Content Analysis. Qualitative Health Research 15, 9 (2005), 1277–1288.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732305276687
[31] John P. A. Ioannidis. 2012. Why Science Is Not Necessarily Self-Correcting. Perspectives on Psychological Science 7, 6 (2012), 645–654.
[32] Pratyusha Kalluri. 2019. The Values of Machine Learning. https : / / slideslive . com / 38923453 / the - values - of - machine - learning
https://slideslive.com/38923453/the-values-of-machine-learning.
[33] Pratyusha Kalluri. 2020. Don’t ask if Artificial Intelligence is Good or Fair, ask how it Shifts Power. Nature 583, 7815 (2020), 169–169.
[34] Maurice G Kendall and B Babington Smith. 1939. The problem of m rankings. The annals of mathematical statistics 10, 3 (1939), 275–287.
[35] Andrei P Kirilenko and Svetlana Stepchenkova. 2016. Inter-coder agreement in one-to-many classification: fuzzy kappa. PloS one 11, 3 (2016),
e0149787.
[36] Laura Krefting. 1991. Rigor in Qualitative Research: The Assessment of Trustworthiness. American Journal of Occupational Therapy 45, 3 (03 1991),
214–222. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.45.3.214
[37] Klaus Krippendorff. 2018. Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology . Sage Publications.
[38] Thomas S. Kuhn. 1977. Objectivity, Value Judgment, and Theory Choice. In The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and Change .
University of Chicago Press, 320–39.
[39] Jason Edward Lewis, Angie Abdilla, Noelani Arista, Kaipulaumakaniolono Baker, Scott Benesiinaabandan, Michelle Brown, Melanie Cheung,
Meredith Coleman, Ashley Cordes, Joel Davison, et al. 2020. Indigenous Protocol and Artificial Intelligence Position Paper. (2020).
[40] T. Lewis, S. P. Gangadharan, M. Saba, and T. Petty. 2018. Digital Defense Playbook: Community power tools for reclaiming data . Our Data Bodies.
[41] Yvonna S. Lincoln and Egon G. Guba. 2006. Naturalistic inquiry . Sage Publ.
[42] Zachary C. Lipton and Jacob Steinhardt. 2019. Troubling Trends in Machine Learning Scholarship: Some ML Papers Suffer from Flaws That Could
Mislead the Public and Stymie Future Research. Queue 17, 1 (2019), 45–77. https://doi.org/10.1145/3317287.3328534
[43] Helen E. Longino. 1996. Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Values in Science: Rethinking the Dichotomy. In Feminism, Science, and the Philosophy of
Science , Lynn Hankinson Nelson and Jack Nelson (Eds.). Springer Netherlands, 39–58.
[44] Ernan McMullin. 1982. Values in science. In Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association .
16
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
[45] Sharan B Merriam and Robin S Grenier. 2019. Qualitative Research in Practice . Jossey-Bass.
[46] Robert K. Merton. 1973. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations . University of Chicago press.
[47] Shakir Mohamed, Marie-Therese Png, and William Isaac. 2020. Decolonial AI: Decolonial Rheory as Sociotechnical Foresight in Artificial Intelligence.
Philosophy & Technology 33 (2020), 659––684.
[48] Priyanka Nanayakkara, Jessica Hullman, and Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2021. Unpacking the Expressed Consequences of AI Research in Broader Impact
Statements. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society . https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462608
[49] Helen Noble and Joanna Smith. 2015. Issues of validity and reliability in qualitative research. Evidence Based Nursing 18, 2 (Apr 2015), 34–35.
[50] Safiya Umoja Noble. 2018. Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism . NYU Press.
[51] Cathy O’Neil. 2016. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy . Broadway Books.
[52] Frank Pasquale. 2015. The black box society . Harvard University Press.
[53] Michael Quinn Patton. 1990. Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods . Sage.
[54] M Q Patton. 1999. Enhancing the quality and credibility of qualitative analysis. Health Services Research 34, 5 (Dec 1999).
[55] Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. 2020. Performative Prediction. In Proceedings of ICML .
[56] Vinay Uday Prabhu and Abeba Birhane. 2020. Large Image Datasets: A Pyrrhic Win for Computer Vision? arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16923 (2020).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.16923
[57] Phillip Rogaway. 2015. The Moral Character of Cryptographic Work. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2015/1162. https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/1162.
[58] Anna Rogers. 2019. Peer review in NLP: reject-if-not-SOTA. Hacking Semantics blog (2019). https://hackingsemantics.xyz/2020/reviewing-
models/#everything-wrong-with-reject-if-not-sota
[59] Daniela Rus. 2018. Rise of the robots: Are you ready? Financial Times Magazine (March 2018). https://www.ft.com/content/e31c4986-20d0-11e8-
a895-1ba1f72c2c11
[60] Harini Suresh and John V. Guttag. 2019. A Framework for Understanding Unintended Consequences of Machine Learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.10002 (2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.10002
[61] Denis Trapido. 2015. How Novelty in Knowledge Earns Recognition: The Role of Consistent Identities. Research Policy 44, 8 (2015), 1488–1500.
[62] Christiaan H. Vinkers, Joeri K. Tijdink, and Willem M. Otte. 2015. Use of Positive and Negative Words in Scientific PubMed Abstracts between 1974
and 2014: Retrospective Analysis. BMJ 351 (2015).
[63] Kiri Wagstaff. 2012. Machine Learning that Matters. In Proceedings of ICML .
[64] Joseph Weizenbaum. 1972. On the Impact of the Computer on Society. Science 176, 4035 (1972), 609–614.
[65] Langdon Winner. 1977. Autonomous Technology: Technics-out-of-Control as a Theme in Political Thought . MIT Press.
[66] Langdon Winner. 1980. Do Artifacts Have Politics? Daedalus 109, 1 (1980), 121–136.
17
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
A ADDITIONAL METHODOLOGICAL DETAILS
A.1 Data Sources
To determine the most-cited papers from each conference, we rely on the publicly-available Semantic Scholar database
[5], which includes bibliographic information for scientific papers, including citation counts.13Using this data, we
chose the most cited papers from each of 2008, 2009, 2018, 2019 published at NeurIPS and ICML.
Like all bibliographic databases, Semantic Scholar is imperfect. Upon manual review, we wish to document that our
selection includes one paper that was actually published in 2010, and one that was retracted from NeurIPS prior to
publication (see §I for details). In addition, the citations counts used to determine the most cited papers reflect a static
moment in time, and may differ from other sources.
Because our artifacts of study are papers that have been previously published at NeurIPS or ICML, we surmise that
the authors normatively expect and consent to their papers and themselves as authors being referenced and analyzed
in future papers, e.g. this paper. Accordingly, we chose not to seek explicit permission from the original authors to
reference, annotate, and analyze their papers. The annotations we generated do not introduce any new personally
identifying information or offensive content. The sentences from the original published papers are necessarily part of
our annotations; to the extent that these papers have these issues, these sentences may contain personally identifying
information or offensive content. Given the original authors contributed their work to the same venues as our own
work, we believe that the potential to cause new harm from this inclusion is minimal.
A.2 Defining elite university
To determine the list of elite universities, we follow Ahmed and Wahed [ 4], and rely on the QS World University
Rankings for the discipline of computer science. For 2018/19, we take the top 50 schools from the CS rankings for 2018.
For 2008/09, we take the top 50 schools from the CS rankings for 2011, as the closest year for which data is available.
A.3 Defining big tech
We used Abdalla and Abdalla’s [ 2] criterion to what is considered “big tech”, which is comprised of: Alibaba, Amazon,
Apple, Element AI, Facebook, Google, Huawei, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, Nvidia, Open AI, Samsung, and Uber. Furthermore,
we added DeepMind to this list, which Google acquired in 2014. We considered all other companies as “non-big tech”.
B ANNOTATIONS
We include the annotations of all papers as supplementary material at https://github.com/wagnew3/The-Values-
Encoded-in-Machine-Learning-Research with a CC BY-NC-SA license. To present a birds-eye view of the value
annotations, we present randomly selected examples of annotated sentences in Appendix H.
C COMBINING VALUES
In some cases, values had strong overlap with related values (e.g., Performance is closely related to Accuracy ). In other
cases, we had annotated for several fine-grained values that we found could be combined (e.g., Data Efficiency andLabel
Efficiency are types of Efficiency ). Following best practices, we identified such values and combined them for our main
analysis. In Figure C.1 we list all values before combining, and in Table 7 we list the combinations.
13http://s2-public-api.prod.s2.allenai.org/corpus/
18
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
Fig. C.1. Proportion of annotated papers that uplifted each value, prior to combining.
19
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
Table 7. Sets of values combined for analysis in the main paper
Overarching value Set of values
Performance Performance, Accuracy, State-of-the-art
Building on past work Building on classic work, Building on recent work
Generalization Generalization, Avoiding train/test discrepancy, Flexibility/extensibility
Efficiency Efficiency, Data efficiency, Energy efficiency, Fast, Label efficiency,
Low cost, Memory efficiency, Reduced training time
D REFLEXIVITY STATEMENT
The cloak of objectivity is an important part of what we are challenging in this paper. We are encouraging all researchers
to reflect on what norms, perspectives, privileges, or incentives may be shaping their work. By sharing a bit about
ourselves, we help make it possible for others to find biases we might not have recognized, and we hope to create space
for other peoples and values at the margins. Our team is multi-racial and multi-gender and includes undergraduate,
graduate, and post-graduate researchers engaged with AI, machine learning, NLP, robotics, cognitive science, critical
theory, grassroots community organizing, abolitionist community organizing, arts, and philosophy of science. We
are privileged due to our affiliations with well resourced Western universities enabling our research and its eventual
publication with relative ease (for example, compared to the challenges our peers in the global South might have faced).
Furthermore, as these Western universities have a history of racism, colonialism and white-supremacy, being embedded
in such ecology makes it impossible to entirely sever our research from such histories. Notably for our work, it is
possible that different authors might have identified a somewhat different set of values, and/or recognized these values
differently in the text, and we acknowledge that we may have gaps in understanding with respect to what is important
to others, most importantly to us, what is important to our and other communities at the margins. In addition, we
recognize that the notion of an “elite” university, which we have adopted from past work (both the category and the
members), implies a ranking or hierarchy among institutions of higher education that may be unjust to many others.
Throughout the paper, we have attempted to adopt a critical perspective, but it is likely that there are still many parts
of the broader machine learning ecosystem that we simply take for granted, and which should be recognized and
challenged.
E EXPERIMENTS WITH USING TEXT CLASSIFICATION TO IDENTIFY VALUES
Although it was not our primary purpose in annotating highly-cited papers, we include here a brief report on using
the annotations we generated as potential training data for classifiers that could in principle be used to estimate the
prevalence of these values in a larger set of ML papers. This is something that we should approach with great caution for
several reasons: i) we only have a relatively small training set of annotated examples with respect to machine learning
best practices; ii) these annotations are taken from a non-random set of papers, and any models trained on these
data may not generalize to all papers; iii) an automated approach will fail to detect additional, previously unobserved,
emergent values; and iv) based on our experiences annotating these papers, we expect that many would be expressed
subtly and in varied ways that would be difficult to detect automatically, at least without considerably more training
data.
To present a baseline for testing the potential of this approach, while avoiding any biases that might be introduced
by pretrained language models, we make use of simple regularized logistic regression classifiers operating on unigram
features. We trained models separately for each value (for all values that had at least 20 relevant sentences, using all
20
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
relevant sentences for the higher-order grouped values), treating each sentence as an instance with a binary label
(present or not), tokenizing each sentence using spaCy and converting each to a binary feature representation indicating
the presence or absence of each word in the vocabulary (all words occurring at least twice in the corpus). These choices
were not tuned. We randomly selected 300 sentences to use as a held out test set (using the same test set for each value),
and trained a model using the remaining data, using 5-fold cross validation to tune the regularization strength.
F1 scores on the test set for the various models are shown in Figure E.2 (right), and can generally be seen to be
unimpressive. The F1 score for most values is on the order of 0.5 or less, and some values, even relatively common ones
such as Unifying Ideas , ended up with an F1 score of 0. The most highly-weighted features for most classifiers were
quite reasonable, but this is evidently a relatively difficult task, at least given this amount of data. The exceptions to
this poor performance included the Performance-related values ( Performance ,Accuracy , and State-of-the-art ), as well
asEffectiveness , and Facilitating Use , all of which had F1 scores greater than 0.75, and most of which were typically
represented by a relatively small set of terms (e.g., "accurate", "accuracy", "accurately", "inaccurate", "accuracies", "errors",
etc. for Accuracy ).
Although the poor performance of these classifiers means we should interpret any use of them with caution, we
explore applying them to a broader set of papers for the sake of completeness. To do so, we download pdfs of all
papers published at NeurIPS and ICML for the years 2008 through 2020, convert these to text using pdftotext , and
extract sentences from this text, excluding references, as well as very short sentences (less than 6 tokens) or lines
without alphabetic characters. Note that due to the difficulty of automatically parsing papers into sections, these textual
representations are not limited to the abstract, introduction, discussion, and conclusion, in contrast to our annotations,
thus we would expect most values to occur more frequently, especially those that are likely to occur in sections about
experiments and results.
We then apply the classifiers trained above to each sentence in each paper. For each value, we then compute the
proportion of papers (combining NeurIPS and ICML for this entire time period) that had at least one sentence predicted
to exhibit that value. The overall proportions are shown in Figure E.2 (left). As can be seen, the relative prevalence
of values is broadly similar to our anntoated sample, though many are predicted to occur with greater frequency, as
expected. However, to reiterate, we should be highly skeptical of these findings, given the poor performance of the
classifiers, and we can view this analysis to be useful more so to deepen our understanding of appropriate methodology.
Finally, as an additional exploration, we focus on the Performance-related values ( Performance ,Accuracy , and State-
of-the-art ), which represent the overall most prevalent cluster in our annotations and were relatively easy to identify
using classification due to their typically simple and explicit expression. We plot the estimated frequency over time for
both conferences. For NeurIPS, which has better archival practices, we extend the analysis back to 1987. We should
again treat these results with caution, given all the caveats above, as well as the fact that we are now applying these
classifiers outside the temporal range from which the annotations were collected. Nevertheless, the results, shown
in Figure E.3, suggest that these values have gradually become more common in NeurIPS over time, reinforcing the
contingent nature of the dominance of the current set of values. Further investigation is required, however, in order to
verify this finding.
F CODE AND REPRODUCIBILITY
Our code and annotations are available with a CC BY-NC-SA license at https://github.com/wagnew3/The-Values-
Encoded-in-Machine-Learning-Research. The text classification experiments were run on a 2019 Macbook Air.
21
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Est. prop. of papersPerformance Values
Performance
Accuracy
State-of-The-Art
Building On Past Work
Building on Recent Work
Building on Classic Work
Generalization Values
Generalization
Flexibility/Extensibility
Efficiency Values
Efficiency
Low Cost
Data Efficiency
Label Efficiency
Fast
Reduced Training Time
Memory Efficiency
Quantitative Evidence
Novelty
Understanding (For Researchers)
Applies to real world
Formal Description/Analysis
Simplicity
Identifying Limitations
Robustness
Unifying Ideas
Effectiveness
Theoretical Guarantees
Scientific Methodology
Used in practice/Popular
Approximation
Large Scale
Scales Up
Successful
Qualitative Evidence
Generality
Facilitating Use
Improvement
Useful
Parallelizability / Distributed
Practical
Requires Few Resources
Realistic Output
Optimal
Security
PrivacyNeurIPS and ICML (2008-2020)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
F1F1 scores
Fig. E.2. Proportion of papers in from 2008–2020 (combining NeurIPS and ICML) predicted to have at least one sentence expressing
each value (left), and estimated performance (F1) of the corresponding classifiers (right). Note that the overall performance of most
classifiers is generally poor, indicating that the estimates on the left should be treated as unreliable in most cases. Grey bars represent
the clustered values. Classifiers were not trained for values with less than 20 representative sentences.
22
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 20200.00.20.40.60.81.0Proportion of papersPerformance
NeurIPS
ICML
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 20200.00.20.40.60.81.0Proportion of papersAccuracy
NeurIPS
ICML
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 20200.00.20.40.60.81.0Proportion of papersState-of-the-art
NeurIPS
ICML
Fig. E.3. Proportion of papers per year (of those published in ICML and NeurIPS) that are classified as having at least one sentence
expressing Performance ,Accuracy , orState-of-the-art , (top, middle, and bottom), based on simple text classifiers trained on our
annotations. Bands show ±2 standard deviations, reflecting the changing overall number of papers per year.
G POTENTIAL NEGATIVE SOCIETAL IMPACTS
Because this paper primarily relies on socially conscientious manual annotation of papers already published at NeurIPS
and ICML, we believe that the potential negative societal impacts of carrying out these annotations and sharing them
are minimal. However, we still briefly comment on this here.
We believe our annotation work poses no risk to living beings, human rights concerns, threats to livelihoods, etc.
Similarly, all annotators are co-authors on this paper, thus there was no risk to participants, beyond what we chose to
take on for ourselves. We have further discussed these aspects of the data in §A.1. Our computational experiments are
done locally and have resource usage on par with everyday computer usage.
One area of potential concern to readers, particularly researchers, may be regarding adopting a punitive stance
toward individuals, unintentionally casting certain authors in a negative light, or unintentionally contributing to
harmful tensions within the ML community. We wish to directly express that throughout this paper we have sought to
avoid punitive language toward individuals and adopt language emphasizing systematic patterns. In order to further
minimize the former, we have chosen to include randomly selected examples omitting author attributions from quoted
sources in the main paper. To complement this and meet the need for completeness, transparency, and reproducibility
of our work, we include a full list of cited papers below, so as to acknowledge this work without drawing unnecessary
attention to any one particular source.
Although our intention is to broaden and deepen the conversation, we acknowledge that some authors may perceive
our work as being not representative of the type of work they would like to see at an ML conference, and possibly
23
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
detrimental to the conference. However, because of the prominence and influence of machine learning today, it is
especially important to have these conversations at these venues, and we hope that our paper will be the basis for
useful conversations and future work. As expressed in the main paper, these perceptions and norms may be precisely
those that are more contingent than the community realizes; these norms may be shaped, dismantled, transformed, or
reenvisioned for the better.
H RANDOM EXAMPLES
The list below contains 100 random examples drawn from the annotated data, along with the set of annotated values
for each. These sentences were annotated for values within the context of the paper.
•The problem of minimizing the rank of a matrix variable subject to certain constraints arises in many fields including
machine learning, automatic control, and image compression. Used in practice/Popular
•Locality-sensitive hashing [6] is an effective technique that performs approximate nearest neighbor searches in time
that is sub-linear in the size of the database Approximation ,Building on recent work ,Effectiveness ,Fast
•In the finite case, analysis of optimization and generalization of fully-trained nets is of course an open problem
Formal description/analysis ,Generalization
•So to achieve adversarial robustness, a classifier must generalize in a stronger sense. Generalization ,Robustness
•Robustness to label corruption is similarly improved by wide margins, such that pre-training alone outperforms
certain task-specific methods, sometimes even after combining these methods with pre-training. Performance ,
Robustness ,Understanding (for researchers)
•RBMs have been particularly successful in classification problems either as feature extractors for text and image data
(Gehler et al., 2006) or as a good initial training phase for deep neural network classifiers (Hinton, 2007). Building
on recent work ,Flexibility/Extensibility ,Successful
•Our theoretical analysis naturally leads to a new formulation of adversarial defense which has several appealing
properties; in particular, it inherits the benefits of scalability to large datasets exhibited by Tiny ImageNet, and the
algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance on a range of benchmarks while providing theoretical guarantees.
Robustness ,Scales up ,Security ,Theoretical guarantees
•The current paper focuses on the training loss, but does not address the test loss. Generalization
•This result is significant since stochastic methods are highly preferred for their efficiency over deterministic gradient
methods in machine learning applications. Efficiency
•Ranking, which is to sort objects based on certain factors, is the central problem of applications such as in- formation
retrieval (IR) and information filtering. Applies to real world ,Used in practice/Popular
•This subspace is important, because, when projected onto this subspace, the means of the distributions are well-
separated, yet the typical distance between points from the same distribution is smaller than in the original space.
Important
•Overall, the existence of such adversarial examples raises concerns about the robustness of current classifiers.
Identifying limitations ,Robustness
•We have shown that biased compressors if naively used can lead to bad generalization, and even non-convergence.
Formal description/analysis ,Generalization
•Bartlett and Mendelson [2002] provide a generalization bound for Lipschitz loss functions. Building on classic
work ,Generalization
24
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
•The principal advantage of taking this “lateral” approach arises from the fact that compact representation in trajectory
space is better motivated physically than compact representation in shape space Realistic world model
•In this paper, we show that gradient descent on deep overparametrized networks can obtain zero training loss Formal
description/analysis ,Theoretical guarantees
•Moreover, web queries often have different meanings for different users (a canonical example is the query jaguar )
suggesting that a ranking with diverse documents may be preferable. Diverse output ,User influence
•We include human performance estimates for all benchmark tasks, which verify that substantial headroom exists
between a strong BERT-based baseline and human performance. Learning from humans ,Performance
•Inthis paper we propose a simple and fast algorithm SVP(Singular Value Projec-tion) for rank minimization under
affine constraints (ARMP) and show that SVP recovers the minimum rank solution for affine constraints that satisfy
a restricted isometry property(RIP). Fast ,Novelty ,Simplicity
•We use standard formalization of multiclass classification, where data consists of sample x and its label y (an integer
from 1 to k). Building on classic work
•A number of recent work has shown that the low rank solution can be recovered exactly via minimizing the trace
norm under certain conditions (Recht et al., 2008a; Recht et al., 2008b; Candès and Recht, 2008). Building on recent
work
•This difficulty has necessitated the use of a heuristic inference procedure, that nonetheless was accurate enough for
successful learning. Accuracy ,Successful
•We illustrate such potential by measuring search space properties relevant to architecture search. Quantitative
evidence (e.g. experiments)
•Deep architectures consist of feature detector units arranged in layers. Lower layers detect simple features and feed
into higher layers, which in turn detect more complex features. Simplicity
•This makes the updates hard to massively parallelize at a coarse, dataparallel level (e.g., by computing the updates
in parallel and summing them together centrally) without losing the critical stochastic nature of the updates. Large
scale ,Parallelizability / distributed
•This suggests future work on model robustness should evaluate proposed methods with pretraining in order to correctly
gauge their utility, and some work could specialize pre-training for these downstream tasks. Robustness
•Adversarial training remains among the most trusted defenses, but it is nearly intractable on largescale problems.
Scales up ,Security
•For complex robots such as humanoids or light-weight arms, it is often hard to model the system sufficiently well
and, thus, modern regression methods offer a viable alternative [7,8]. Realistic world model
•In contrast to prior work that operates in this goal-setting model, we use states as goals directly, which allows for
simple and fast training of the lower layer. Reduced training time ,Simplicity
•Meanwhile, using less resources tends to produce less compelling results (Negrinho and Gordon, 2017; Baker et al.,
2017a). Requires few resources
•This finding represents an exciting opportunity for defense against neural fake news: the best models for generating
neural disinformation are also the best models at detecting it. Applies to real world
•Our strong empirical results suggest that randomized smoothing is a promising direction for future research into
adversarially robust classification. Quantitative evidence (e.g. experiments) ,Robustness ,Security
•We then turn our attention to identifying the roots of BatchNorm’s success. Successful ,Understanding (for
researchers)
25
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
•We also report the results of large-scale experiments comparing these three methods which demonstrate the benefits
of the mixture weight method: this method consumes less resources, while achieving a performance comparable to
that of standard approaches. Large scale ,Performance ,Requires few resources
•This paper does not cover the the generalization of over-parameterized neural networks to the test data. Avoiding
train/test discrepancy ,Generalization
•While there has been success with robust classifiers on simple datasets [31, 36, 44, 48], more complicated datasets
still exhibit a large gap between “‘standard” and robust accuracy [3, 11]. Applies to real world ,Robustness ,
Successful
•In this paper, we have shown theoretically how independence between examples can make the actual effect much
smaller. Novelty ,Theoretical guarantees
•We provide empirical evidence that several recently-used methods for estimating the probability of held-out documents
are inaccurate and can change the results of model comparison. Accuracy ,Building on recent work ,Quantitative
evidence (e.g. experiments)
•This agreement is robust across different architectures, optimization methods, and loss functions Robustness
•Unfortunately, due to the slow-changing policy in an actor-critic setting, the current and target value estimates
remain too similar to avoid maximization bias. Accuracy
•As a future work, we are pursuing a better understanding of probabilistic distributions on the Grassmann manifold.
Understanding (for researchers)
•We also view these results as an opportunity to encourage the community to pursue a more systematic investigation of
the algorithmic toolkit of deep learning and the underpinnings of its effectiveness. Effectiveness ,Understanding
(for researchers)
•This challenge is further exacerbated in continuous state and action spaces, where a separate actor network is often
used to perform the maximization in Q-learning. Performance
•The vulnerability of neural networks to adversarial perturbations has recently been a source of much discussion and
is still poorly understood. Robustness ,Understanding (for researchers)
•Most of the evaluation methods described in this paper extend readily to more complicated topic models— including
non-parametric versions based on hierarchical Dirichlet processes (Teh et al., 2006)—since they only require a MCMC
algorithm for sampling the latent topic assignments z for each document and a way of evaluating probability P(w | z,
Φ,𝛼m).Flexibility/Extensibility ,Understanding (for researchers)
•In a formulation closely related to the dual problem, we have: ˆ𝑤= argmin w:F (w)≤c 1 n Xn i=1 ℓ(hw, xii, yi) (2)
where, instead of regularizing, a hard restriction over the parameter space is imposed (by the constant c). Formal
description/analysis
•Second, we evaluate a surrogate loss function from four aspects: (a) consistency, (b) soundness, (c) mathemat- ical
properties of continuity, differentiability, and con- vexity, and (d) computational efficiency in learning. Efficiency
•This leads to two natural questions that we try to answer in this paper: (1) Is it feasible to perform optimization in
this very large feature space with cost which is polynomial in the size of the input space? Performance
•Despite its pervasiveness, the exact reasons for BatchNorm’s effectiveness are still poorly understood. Understanding
(for researchers)
•We have presented confidenceweighted linear classifiers, a new learning method designed for NLP problems based on
the notion of parameter confidence. Novelty
26
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
•In addition, the experiments reported here suggest that (like other strategies recently proposed to train deep determin-
istic or stochastic neural networks) the curriculum strategies appear on the surface to operate like a regularizer, i.e.,
their beneficial effect is most pronounced on the test set. Beneficence ,Quantitative evidence (e.g. experiments)
•These give further inside into hash-spaces and explain previously made empirical observations. Understanding
(for researchers)
•This means that current algorithms reach their limit at problems of size 1TB whenever the algorithm is I/O bound
(this amounts to a training time of 3 hours), or even smaller problems whenever the model parametrization makes
the algorithm CPU bound. Memory efficiency ,Reduced training time
•Much of the results presented were based on the assumption that the target distribution is some mixture of the source
distributions. Valid assumptions
•Empirical investigation revealed that this agrees well with actual training dynamics and predictive distributions
across fully-connected, convolutional, and even wide residual network architectures, as well as with different op-
timizers (gradient descent, momentum, mini-batching) and loss functions (MSE, cross-entropy). Generalization ,
Quantitative evidence (e.g. experiments) ,Understanding (for researchers)
•We design a new spectral norm that encodes this a priori assumption, without the prior knowledge of the partition of
tasks into groups, resulting in a new convex optimization formulation for multi-task learning. Novelty
•Recent progress in natural language generation has raised dual-use concerns. Progress
•These kernel functions can be used in shallow architectures, such as support vector machines (SVMs), or in deep
kernel-based architectures that we call multilayer kernel machines (MKMs). Flexibility/Extensibility
•Using MCMC instead of variational methods for approximate inference in Bayesian matrix factorization models
leads to much larger improvements over the MAP trained models, which suggests that the assumptions made
by the variational methods about the structure of the posterior are not entirely reasonable. Understanding (for
researchers)
•In particular, the deep belief network (DBN) (Hinton et al., 2006) is a multilayer generative model where each layer
encodes statistical dependencies among the units in the layer below it; it is trained to (approximately) maximize the
likelihood of its training data. Approximation ,Data efficiency
•Furthermore, the learning accuracy and performance of our LGP approach will be compared with other important
standard methods in Section 4, e.g., LWPR [8], standard GPR [1], sparse online Gaussian process regression (OGP) [5]
and𝜈-support vector regression ( 𝜈-SVR) [11], respectively Accuracy ,Performance ,Quantitative evidence (e.g.
experiments)
••propose a simple method based on weighted minibatches to stochastically train with arbitrary weights on the terms
of our decomposition without any additional hyperparameters. Efficiency ,Simplicity
•For example, Ng (2004) examined the task of PAC learning a sparse predictor and analyzed cases in which an ℓ1
constraint results in better solutions than an ℓ2 constraint. Building on recent work
•Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling, 2017) are an efficient variant of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) on graphs. GCNs stack layers of learned first-order spectral filters followed by a nonlinear activation
function to learn graph representations. Efficiency
•This is a linear convergence rate. Building on recent work ,Efficiency ,Quantitative evidence (e.g. experi-
ments) ,Theoretical guarantees
•However, as we observe more interactions, this could emerge as a clear feature. Building on recent work ,Data
efficiency
27
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
•Here we propose the first method that supports arbitrary low accuracy and even biased compression operators, such
as in (Alistarh et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2018; Stich et al., 2018). Accuracy ,Novelty
•Much recent work has been done on understanding under what conditions we can learn a mixture model. Under-
standing (for researchers)
•For this reason, we present an extension of the standard greedy OMP algorithm that can be applied to general struc-
tured sparsity problems, and more importantly, meaningful sparse recovery bounds can be obtained for this algorithm.
Building on recent work
•In this paper we show that this assumption is indeed necessary: by considering a simple yet prototypical exampleof
GAN training we analytically show that (unregularized) GAN training is not always locally convergent Formal
description/analysis
•Overestimation bias is a property of Q-learning in which the maximization of a noisy value estimate induces a
consistent overestimation Accuracy
•This drawback prevents GPR from applications which need large amounts of training data and require fast computa-
tion, e.g., online learning of inverse dynamics model for model-based robot control Fast ,Large scale
•This is problematic since we find there are techniques which do not comport well with pre-training; thus some
evaluations of robustness are less representative of real-world performance than previously thought. Applies to real
world ,Performance ,Robustness
•Approximation of this prior structure through simple, efficient hyperparameter optimization steps is sufficient to
achieve these performance gains Approximation ,Efficiency ,Performance ,Simplicity
•The second mysterious phenomenon in training deep neural networks is “deeper networks are harder to train.”
Performance
•However, the definition of our metric is sufficiently general that it could easily be used to test, for example, invariance
of auditory features to rate of speech, or invariance of textual features to author identity. Generalization
•In Sec. 6 we test the proposed algorithm for face recognition and object categorization tasks. Applies to real world ,
Quantitative evidence (e.g. experiments)
•It is possible to train classification RBMs directly for classification performance; the gradient is fairly simple and
certainly tractable. Performance
•Figure 1 contrasts these two approaches. Defining and evaluating models using ODE solvers has several benefits:
Beneficence
•They claim to achieve 12% robustness against non-targeted attacks that are within an ‘2 radius of 3 (for images with
pixels in [0, 1]). Generalization ,Robustness
•Two commonly used penalties are the 1- norm and the square of the 2-norm of w. Used in practice/Popular
•What should platforms do? Video-sharing platforms like YouTube use deep neural networks to scan videos while they
are uploaded, to filter out content like pornography (Hosseini et al., 2017). Applies to real world
•We mention various properties of this penalty, and provide conditions for the consistency of support estimation in the
regression setting. Finally, we report promising results on both simulated and real data Applies to real world
•There could be a separate feature for “high school student,” “male,” “athlete,” and “musician” and the presence or
absence of each of these features is what defines each person and determines their relationships. Building on recent
work
•So, the over-parameterized convergence theory of DNN is much simpler than that of RNN. Simplicity ,Understand-
ing (for researchers)
28
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
•Other threat models are possible: for instance, an adversary might generate comments or have entire dialogue agents,
they might start with a human-written news article and modify a few sentences, and they might fabricate images or
video. Learning from humans
•More generally, we hope that future work will be able to avoid relying on obfuscated gradients (and other methods
that only prevent gradient descent-based attacks) for perceived robustness, and use our evaluation approach to detect
when this occurs. Generality ,Robustness
•For example, the learned linear combination does not consistently outperform either the uniform combination of base
kernels or simply the best single base kernel (see, for example, UCI dataset experiments in [9, 12], see also NIPS 2008
workshop). Performance
•Our main contributions are: •We analyze GP-UCB, an intuitive algorithm for GP optimization, when the function is
either sampled from a known GP, or has low RKHS norm. Optimal
•For the standard linear setting, Dani et al. (2008) provide a near-complete characterization explicitly dependent on
the dimensionality. In the GP setting, the challenge is to characterize complexity in a different manner, through
properties of the kernel function. Building on classic work
•This allows us to map each architecture A to its approximate hyperparameter optimized accuracy Accuracy
•Unfortunately, they could only apply their method to linear networks. Flexibility/Extensibility
•The strength of the adversary then allows for a trade-off between the enforced prior, and the data-dependent features.
Understanding (for researchers)
•We observe that the computational bottleneck of NAS is the training of each child model to convergence, only to
measure its accuracy whilst throwing away all the trained weights. Accuracy
•We show that the number of subproblems need only be logarithmic in the total number of possible labels, making
thisapproach radically more efficient than others. Efficiency
•We establish a new notion of quadratic approximation of the neural network, and connect it to the SGD theory of
escaping saddle points. Novelty ,Unifying ideas or integrating components
•In this work, we decompose the prediction error for adversarial examples (robust error) as the sum of the natural
(classification) error and boundary error, and provide a differentiable upper bound using the theory of classification-
calibrated loss, which is shown to be the tightest possible upper bound uniform over all probability distributions and
measurable predictors. Accuracy ,Robustness ,Theoretical guarantees
•A limit on the number of queries can be a result of limits on other resources, such as a time limit if inference time
is a bottleneck or a monetary limit if the attacker incurs a cost for each query. Applies to real world ,Low cost ,
Requires few resources
•Preliminary experiments demonstrate that it is significantly faster than batch alternatives on large datasets that may
contain millions of training examples, yet it does not require learning rate tuning like regular stochastic gradient
descent methods. Quantitative evidence (e.g. experiments) ,Reduced training time
•SuperGLUE is available at super.gluebenchmark.com. Facilitating use (e.g. sharing code)
I FULL LIST OF CITED PAPERS
The full list of annotated papers is given below, along with the annotated scores (in square brackets) for Discussion of
Negative Potential [left] (0 = Doesn’t mention negative potential; 1 = Mentions but does not discuss negative potential;
2 = Discusses negative potential) and Justification [right] (1 = Does not mention societal need; 2 = States but does not
justify how it connects to a societal need; 3 = States and somewhat justifies how it connects to a societal need; 4 = States
29
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
and rigorously justifies how it connects to a a societal need). Note that due to minor errors in the data sources used, the
distribution of papers over venues and years is not perfectly balanced. For the same reason, the list also contains one
paper from 2010 (rather than 2009), as well as one paper that was retracted before publication at NeurIPS (marked with
a∗).
•Mingxing Tan, Quoc Le. EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings
of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Sanjeev Arora, Simon Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Ruosong Wang. Fine-Grained Analysis of Optimization and
Generalization for Overparameterized Two-Layer Neural Networks. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, Zico Kolter. Certified Adversarial Robustness via Randomized Smoothing. In
Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Hongyang Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Jiantao Jiao, Eric Xing, Laurent El Ghaoui, Michael Jordan. Theoretically Principled
Trade-off between Robustness and Accuracy. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/2]
•Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Jianfeng Lu, Tie-Yan Liu. MASS: Masked Sequence to Sequence Pre-training for
Language Generation. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Felix Wu, Amauri Souza, Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, Kilian Weinberger. Simplifying Graph Convo-
lutional Networks. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, Vaishaal Shankar. Do ImageNet Classifiers Generalize to
ImageNet? In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/2]
•Justin Gilmer, Nicolas Ford, Nicholas Carlini, Ekin Cubuk. Adversarial Examples Are a Natural Consequence of
Test Error in Noise. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Chris Ying, Aaron Klein, Eric Christiansen, Esteban Real, Kevin Murphy, Frank Hutter. NAS-Bench-101: Towards
Reproducible Neural Architecture Search. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/2]
•Dan Hendrycks, Kimin Lee, Mantas Mazeika. Using Pre-Training Can Improve Model Robustness and Uncertainty.
InProceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Quentin Rebjock, Sebastian Stich, Martin Jaggi. Error Feedback Fixes SignSGD and
other Gradient Compression Schemes. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Anastasia Koloskova, Sebastian Stich, Martin Jaggi. Decentralized Stochastic Optimization and Gossip Algorithms
with Compressed Communication. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/2]
•Han Zhang, Ian Goodfellow, Dimitris Metaxas, Augustus Odena. Self-Attention Generative Adversarial Networks.
InProceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Zhao Song. A Convergence Theory for Deep Learning via Over-Parameterization.
InProceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Simon Du, Jason Lee, Haochuan Li, Liwei Wang, Xiyu Zhai. Gradient Descent Finds Global Minima of Deep
Neural Networks. In Proceedings of ICML , 2019. [0/1]
•Anish Athalye, Nicholas Carlini, David Wagner. Obfuscated Gradients Give a False Sense of Security: Circum-
venting Defenses to Adversarial Examples. In Proceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/2]
•Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, Jeff Dean. Efficient Neural Architecture Search via Parameters
Sharing. In Proceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/1]
•Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine. Soft Actor-Critic: Off-Policy Maximum Entropy
Deep Reinforcement Learning with a Stochastic Actor. In Proceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/2]
30
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
•Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam Doron, Vlad Firoiu,
Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA: Scalable Distributed Deep-RL with
Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Architectures. In Proceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/1]
•Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, David Meger. Addressing Function Approximation Error in Actor-Critic Methods.
InProceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/1]
•Hyunjik Kim, Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by Factorising. In Proceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/0]
•Lars Mescheder, Andreas Geiger, Sebastian Nowozin. Which Training Methods for GANs do actually Converge?
InProceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/1]
•Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Behnam Neyshabur, Yi Zhang. Stronger generalization bounds for deep nets via a
compression approach. In Proceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/3]
•Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Anish Athalye, Jessy Lin. Black-box Adversarial Attacks with Limited Queries
and Information. In Proceedings of ICML , 2018. [0/2]
•Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham Kakade, Matthias Seeger. Gaussian Process Optimization in the Bandit
Setting: No Regret and Experimental Design. In Proceedings of ICML , 2010. [0/1]
•Honglak Lee, Roger Grosse, Rajesh Ranganath and Andrew Ng. Convolutional deep belief networks for scalable
unsupervised learning of hierarchical representations. In Proceedings of ICML , 2009. [0/1]
•Julien Mairal, Francis Bach, Jean Ponce and Guillermo Sapiro. Online dictionary learning for sparse coding. In
Proceedings of ICML , 2009. [0/1]
•Yoshua Bengio, Jerome Louradour, Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of
ICML , 2009. [0/1]
•Laurent Jacob, Guillaume Obozinski and Jean-Philippe Vert. Group Lasso with Overlaps and Graph Lasso. In
Proceedings of ICML , 2009. [0/3]
•Chun-Nam Yu and Thorsten Joachims. Learning structural SVMs with latent variables. In Proceedings of ICML ,
2009. [0/2]
•Kilian Weinberger, Anirban Dasgupta, Josh Attenberg, John Langford and Alex Smola. Feature hashing for large
scale multitask learning. In Proceedings of ICML , 2009. [0/2]
•Hanna Wallach, Iain Murray, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and David Mimno. Evaluation methods for topic models. In
Proceedings of ICML , 2009. [0/1]
•Kamalika Chaudhuri, Sham Kakade, Karen Livescu and Karthik Sridharan. Multi-view clustering via canonical
correlation analysis. In Proceedings of ICML , 2009. [0/2]
•Shuiwang Ji and Jieping Ye. An accelerated gradient method for trace norm minimization. In Proceedings of ICML ,
2009. [0/3]
•Junzhou Huang, Tong Zhang and Dimitris Metaxas. Learning with structured sparsity. In Proceedings of ICML ,
2009. [0/1]
•Rajat Raina, Anand Madhavan and Andrew Ng. Large-scale deep unsupervised learning using graphics processors.
InProceedings of ICML , 2009. [0/2]
•Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. A unified architecture for natural language processing: deep neural networks
with multitask learning. In Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/2]
•Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and composing robust
features with denoising autoencoders. In Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
31
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
•Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Andriy Mnih. Bayesian probabilistic matrix factorization using Markov chain Monte
Carlo. In Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•John Duchi, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Yoram Singer, and Tushar Chandra. Efficient projections onto the l1-ball for
learning in high dimensions. In Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Cho-Jui Hsieh, Kai-Wei Chang, Chih-Jen Lin, S. Sathiya Keerthi, and S. Sundararajan. A dual coordinate descent
method for large-scale linear SVM. In Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Tijmen Tieleman. Training restricted Boltzmann machines using approximations to the likelihood gradient. In
Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Hugo Larochelle and Yoshua Bengio. Classification using discriminative restricted Boltzmann machines. In
Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Jihun Hamm and Daniel Lee. Grassmann discriminant analysis: a unifying view on subspace-based learning. In
Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Fen Xia, Tie-Yan Liu, Jue Wang, Wensheng Zhang, and Hang Li. Listwise Approach to Learning to Rank - Theory
and Algorithm. In Proceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Filip Radlinski, Robert Kleinberg, and Thorsten Joachims. Learning diverse rankings with multi-armed bandits.
InProceedings of ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Mark Dredze, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira. Confidence-weighted linear classification. In Proceedings of
ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Iain Murray. On the quantitative analysis of deep belief networks. In Proceedings of
ICML , 2008. [0/1]
•Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R. Salakhutdinov, Quoc V. Le. XLNet: Generalized
Autoregressive Pretraining for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Alexis CONNEAU, Guillaume Lample. Cross-lingual Language Model Pretraining. In Proceedings of NeurIPS ,
2019. [0/4]
•Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, Aleksander Madry. Adversarial
Examples Are Not Bugs, They Are Features. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jeffrey
Pennington. Wide Neural Networks of Any Depth Evolve as Linear Models Under Gradient Descent. In Proceedings
of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Avital Oliver, Colin A. Raffel. MixMatch: A
Holistic Approach to Semi-Supervised Learning. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, Soumith Chintala.
PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Sanjeev Arora, Simon S. Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Russ R. Salakhutdinov, Ruosong Wang. On Exact Computation
with an Infinitely Wide Neural Net. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Li Dong, Nan Yang, Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Xiaodong Liu, Yu Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Ming Zhou, Hsiao-Wuen
Hon. Unified Language Model Pre-training for Natural Language Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings
of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
32
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
•Ali Shafahi, Mahyar Najibi, Mohammad Amin Ghiasi, Zheng Xu, John Dickerson, Christoph Studer, Larry S.
Davis, Gavin Taylor, Tom Goldstein. Adversarial Training for Free! In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/3]
•Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Stefan Lee. ViLBERT: Pretraining Task-Agnostic Visiolinguistic Representa-
tions for Vision-and-Language Tasks. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy,
Samuel Bowman. SuperGLUE: A Stickier Benchmark for General-Purpose Language Understanding Systems. In
Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [1/1]
•Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Hannah Rashkin, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, Franziska Roesner, Yejin Choi.
Defending Against Neural Fake News. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [2/4]
•Yuan Cao, Quanquan Gu. Generalization Bounds of Stochastic Gradient Descent for Wide and Deep Neural
Networks. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Florian Tramer, Dan Boneh. Adversarial Training and Robustness for Multiple Perturbations. In Proceedings of
NeurIPS , 2019. [0/2]
•Yair Carmon, Aditi Raghunathan, Ludwig Schmidt, John C. Duchi, Percy S. Liang. Unlabeled Data Improves
Adversarial Robustness. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Lars Maaløe, Marco Fraccaro, Valentin Liévin, Ole Winther. BIVA: A Very Deep Hierarchy of Latent Variables for
Generative Modeling. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang. Learning and Generalization in Overparameterized Neural Net-
works, Going Beyond Two Layers. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2019. [0/1]
•Durk P. Kingma, Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative Flow with Invertible 1x1 Convolutions. In Proceedings of
NeurIPS , 2018. [0/2]
•Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, David K. Duvenaud. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations.
InProceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/1]
•Zhitao Ying, Jiaxuan You, Christopher Morris, Xiang Ren, Will Hamilton, Jure Leskovec. Hierarchical Graph
Representation Learning with Differentiable Pooling. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/1]
•Ricky T. Q. Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger B. Grosse, David K. Duvenaud. Isolating Sources of Disentanglement in
Variational Autoencoders. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/1]
•Yangyan Li, Rui Bu, Mingchao Sun, Wei Wu, Xinhan Di, Baoquan Chen. PointCNN: Convolution On X-
Transformed Points. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/1]
•Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, Clement Hongler. Neural Tangent Kernel: Convergence and Generalization in
Neural Networks. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/1]
•Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Guilin Liu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, Bryan Catanzaro. Video-to-Video
Synthesis. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/1]
•Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang. Learning Overparameterized Neural Networks via Stochastic Gradient Descent on
Structured Data. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/1]
•Ludwig Schmidt, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Kunal Talwar, Aleksander Madry. Adversarially Robust
Generalization Requires More Data. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/2]
•Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Andrew Ilyas, Aleksander Madry. How Does Batch Normalization Help
Optimization? In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/1]
•Harini Kannan, Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow. Adversarial Logit Pairing. In Proceedings of NeurIPS∗, 2018. [0/2]
33
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri*, Dallas Card*, William Agnew*, Ravit Dotan*, and Michelle Bao*
•Ofir Nachum, Shixiang (Shane) Gu, Honglak Lee, Sergey Levine. Data-Efficient Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2018. [0/3]
•Prateek Jain, Raghu Meka, Inderjit Dhillon. Guaranteed Rank Minimization via Singular Value Projection. In
Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2010. [0/1]
•Hanna Wallach, David Mimno, Andrew McCallum. Rethinking LDA: Why Priors Matter. In Proceedings of NeurIPS ,
2009. [0/4]
•Geoffrey E. Hinton, Russ R. Salakhutdinov. Replicated Softmax: an Undirected Topic Model. In Proceedings of
NeurIPS , 2009. [0/1]
•Daniel J. Hsu, Sham M. Kakade, John Langford, Tong Zhang. Multi-Label Prediction via Compressed Sensing. In
Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2009. [0/1]
•Youngmin Cho, Lawrence Saul. Kernel Methods for Deep Learning. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2009. [0/1]
•Kurt Miller, Michael Jordan, Thomas Griffiths. Nonparametric Latent Feature Models for Link Prediction. In
Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2009. [0/3]
•Ian Goodfellow, Honglak Lee, Quoc Le, Andrew Saxe, Andrew Ng. Measuring Invariances in Deep Networks. In
Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2009. [0/1]
•Vinod Nair, Geoffrey E. Hinton. 3D Object Recognition with Deep Belief Nets. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2009.
[0/1]
•Martin Zinkevich, John Langford, Alex Smola. Slow Learners are Fast. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2009. [0/1]
•Ryan Mcdonald, Mehryar Mohri, Nathan Silberman, Dan Walker, Gideon Mann. Efficient Large-Scale Distributed
Training of Conditional Maximum Entropy Models. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2009. [0/1]
•Corinna Cortes, Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh. Learning Non-Linear Combinations of Kernels. In
Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2009. [0/1]
•Laurent Jacob, Jean-philippe Vert, Francis Bach. Clustered Multi-Task Learning: A Convex Formulation. In
Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
•Kamalika Chaudhuri, Claire Monteleoni. Privacy-preserving logistic regression. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2008.
[0/3]
•Byron M. Yu, John P. Cunningham, Gopal Santhanam, Stephen Ryu, Krishna V. Shenoy, Maneesh Sahani. Gaussian-
process factor analysis for low-dimensional single-trial analysis of neural population activity. In Proceedings of
NeurIPS , 2008. [0/3]
•Ilya Sutskever, Geoffrey E. Hinton, Graham W. Taylor. The Recurrent Temporal Restricted Boltzmann Machine.
InProceedings of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
•Wenyuan Dai, Yuqiang Chen, Gui-rong Xue, Qiang Yang, Yong Yu. Translated Learning: Transfer Learning across
Different Feature Spaces. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/3]
•Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh. Domain Adaptation with Multiple Sources. In Proceedings
of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
•Sham M. Kakade, Karthik Sridharan, Ambuj Tewari. On the Complexity of Linear Prediction: Risk Bounds, Margin
Bounds, and Regularization. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
•Francis Bach. Exploring Large Feature Spaces with Hierarchical Multiple Kernel Learning. In Proceedings of
NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
•Ijaz Akhter, Yaser Sheikh, Sohaib Khan, Takeo Kanade. Nonrigid Structure from Motion in Trajectory Space. In
Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
34
The Values Encoded in Machine Learning Research FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, South Korea
•Prateek Jain, Brian Kulis, Inderjit Dhillon, Kristen Grauman. Online Metric Learning and Fast Similarity Search.
InProceedings of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
•Duy Nguyen-tuong, Jan Peters, Matthias Seeger. Local Gaussian Process Regression for Real Time Online Model
Learning. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
•Lester Mackey. Deflation Methods for Sparse PCA. In Proceedings of NeurIPS , 2008. [0/1]
35