Title: QT-Opt: Scalable Deep Reinforcement Learning for Vision-Based Robotic Manipulation

QT-Opt: Scalable Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Vision-Based Robotic Manipulation
Dmitry Kalashnikov1, Alex Irpan1, Peter Pastor2, Julian Ibarz1,
Alexander Herzog2, Eric Jang1, Deirdre Quillen3, Ethan Holly1,
Mrinal Kalakrishnan2, Vincent Vanhoucke1, Sergey Levine1;3
fdkalashnikov, alexirpan, julianibarz, ejang, eholly, vanhoucke, slevine g@google.com,
fpeterpastor, alexherzog, kalakris g@x.team,fdeirdrequilleng@berkeley.edu
Abstract: In this paper, we study the problem of learning vision-based dynamic
manipulation skills using a scalable reinforcement learning approach. We study
this problem in the context of grasping, a longstanding challenge in robotic ma-
nipulation. In contrast to static learning behaviors that choose a grasp point and
then execute the desired grasp, our method enables closed-loop vision-based con-
trol, whereby the robot continuously updates its grasp strategy based on the most
recent observations to optimize long-horizon grasp success. To that end, we in-
troduce QT-Opt, a scalable self-supervised vision-based reinforcement learning
framework that can leverage over 580k real-world grasp attempts to train a deep
neural network Q-function with over 1.2M parameters to perform closed-loop,
real-world grasping that generalizes to 96% grasp success on unseen objects.
Aside from attaining a very high success rate, our method exhibits behaviors that
are quite distinct from more standard grasping systems: using only RGB vision-
based perception from an over-the-shoulder camera, our method automatically
learns regrasping strategies, probes objects to ﬁnd the most effective grasps, learns
to reposition objects and perform other non-prehensile pre-grasp manipulations,
and responds dynamically to disturbances and perturbations.4
Keywords: grasping, reinforcement learning, deep learning
1 Introduction
Manipulation with object interaction represents one of the largest open problems in robotics: in-
telligently interacting with previously unseen objects in open-world environments requires gener-
alizable perception, closed-loop vision-based control, and dexterous manipulation. Reinforcement
learning offers a promising avenue for tackling this problem, but current work on reinforcement
learning tackles the problem of mastering individual skills, such as hitting a ball [1], opening a
door [2, 3], or throwing [4]. To meet the generalization demands of real-world manipulation, we
focus speciﬁcally on scalable learning with off-policy algorithms, and study this question in the
context of the speciﬁc problem of grasping. While grasping restricts the manipulation problem,
it still retains many of its largest challenges: a grasping system should be able to pick up previ-
ously unseen objects with reliable and effective grasps, while using realistic sensing and actuation.
It thus serves as a microcosm of the larger robotic manipulation problem, providing a challeng-
ing and practically applicable model problem for experimenting with generalization and diverse
object interaction. Much of the existing work on robotic grasping decomposes the task into a sens-
ing, planning, and acting stage: the robot ﬁrst perceives the scene and identiﬁes suitable grasp
locations, then plans a path to those locations [5, 6, 7, 8]. This stands in contrast to the kinds of
grasping behaviors observed in humans and animals, where the grasp is a dynamical process that
1Google Brain, United States
2X, Mountain View, California, United States
3University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States
4Supplementary experiment videos can be found at https://goo.gl/ykQn6g .
2nd Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2018), Z ¨urich, Switzerland.arXiv:1806.10293v3  [cs.LG]  28 Nov 2018
tightly interleaves sensing and control at every stage [9, 10]. This kind of dynamic closed-loop
grasping is likely to be much more robust to unpredictable object physics, limited sensory infor-
mation (e.g., monocular camera inputs instead of depth), and imprecise actuation. A closed-loop
grasping system trained for long-horizon success can also perform intelligent pre-grasping manip-
ulations, such as pushing or repositioning objects for an easier grasp. However, a major challenge
with closed-loop grasp control is that the sensorimotor loop must be closed on the visual modality,
which is very difﬁcult to utilize effectively with standard optimal control methods in novel settings.
Figure 1: Seven robots are set up to collect grasping
episodes with autonomous self-supervision.We study how off-policy deep reinforcement
learning can acquire closed-loop dynamic vi-
sual grasping strategies, using entirely self-
supervised data collection, so as to generalize
to previously unseen objects at test time. The
value of low-level end-effector movements is
predicted directly from raw camera observa-
tions, and the entire system is trained using
grasp attempts in the real world. While the prin-
ciples of deep reinforcement learning have been
known for decades [11, 12], operationalizing
them in a practical robotic learning algorithm
that can generalize to new objects requires a
stable and scalable algorithm and large datasets,
as well as careful system design.
Figure 2: Close-up of a robot cell in our setup (left) and
about 1000 visually and physically diverse training ob-
jects (right). Each cell (left) consists of a KUKA LBR
IIWA arm with a two-ﬁnger gripper and an over-the-
shoulder RGB camera.The implementation in our experiments makes
very simple assumptions: observations come
from a monocular RGB camera located over
the shoulder (see Fig. 2), and actions consist
of end-effector Cartesian motion and gripper
opening and closing commands. The reinforce-
ment learning algorithm receives a binary re-
ward for lifting an object successfully, and no
other reward shaping. This general set of as-
sumptions makes the method feasible to de-
ploy at large scale, allowing us to collect 580k
grasp attempts on 7 real robotic systems. Un-
like most reinforcement learning tasks in the
literature [13, 14], the primary challenge in this
task is not just to maximize reward, but to gen-
eralize effectively to previously unseen objects.
This requires a very diverse set of objects dur-
ing training. To make maximal use of this di-
verse dataset, we propose an off-policy train-
ing method based on a continuous-action gen-
eralization of Q-learning, which we call QT-
Opt. Unlike other continuous action Q-learning
methods [15, 16], which are often unstable due
to actor-critic instability [17, 18], QT-Opt dispenses with the need to train an explicit actor, instead
using stochastic optimization over the critic to select actions and target values [19, 20]. We show that
even fully off-policy training can outperform strong baselines based on prior work, while a moderate
amount of on-policy joint ﬁnetuning with ofﬂine data can improve performance to a success rate of
96% on challenging, previously unseen objects.
Our experimental evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of this approach both quantitatively and
qualitatively. We show that our method attains a high success rate across a range of objects not
seen during training, and our qualitative experiments show that this high success rate is due to the
system adopting a variety of strategies that would be infeasible without closed-loop vision-based
control: the learned policies exhibit corrective behaviors, regrasping, probing motions to ascertain
the best grasp, non-prehensile repositioning of objects, and other features that are feasible only when
grasping is formulated as a dynamic, closed-loop process.
2
2 Related Work
Reinforcement learning has been applied in the context of robotic control using both low-
dimensional [1, 2] and high-dimensional [15, 16] function approximators, including with visual
inputs [21, 3]. However, all of these methods focus on learning narrow, individual tasks, and do not
evaluate on broad generalization to large numbers of novel test objects. Real-world robotic manipu-
lation requires broad generalization, and indeed much of the research on robotic grasping has sought
to achieve such generalization, either through the use of grasp metrics based on ﬁrst principles [22]
or learning [23, 10], with the latter class of methods achieving some of the best results in recent
years [8, 7]. However, current grasping systems typically approach the grasping task as the problem
of predicting a grasp pose , where the system looks at the scene (typically using a depth camera),
chooses the best location at which to grasp, and then executes an open-loop planner to reach that
location [5, 6, 7, 8]. In contrast, our approach uses reinforcement learning with deep neural net-
works, which enables dynamic closed-loop control. This allows our policies to perform pre-grasp
manipulation and respond to dynamic disturbances and, crucially, allows us to learn grasping in a
generic framework that makes minimal assumptions about the task.
While most prior grasping methods operate in open-loop, a number of works have studied closed-
loop grasping [24, 25, 26, 27]. In contrast to these methods, which frame closed-loop grasping as
a servoing problem, our method uses a general-purpose reinforcement learning algorithm to solve
the grasping task, which enables long-horizon reasoning. In practice, this enables our method to
autonomously acquire complex grasping strategies, some of which we illustrate in Section 6. Our
method is also entirely self-supervised, using only grasp outcome labels that are obtained automat-
ically by the robot. Several works have proposed self-supervised grasping systems [28, 27], but to
our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst to incorporate long-horizon reasoning via reinforcement learning
into a generalizable vision-based system trained on self-supervised real-world data. Related to our
work, Zeng et al. [5] recently proposed a Q-learning framework for combining grasping and push-
ing. Our method utilizes a much more generic action space, directly commanding gripper motion in
3D, and exhibits substantially better performance and generalization in our experiments. Finally, in
contrast to many current grasping systems that utilize depth sensing [7, 29] or wrist-mounted cam-
eras [25, 29], our method operates on raw monocular RGB observations from an over-the-shoulder
camera, and the performance of our method indicates that effective learning can achieve excellent
grasp success rates even with very rudimentary sensing.
3 Overview
Figure 3: Our distributed RL infrastructure for QT-Opt
(see Sec. 4.2). State-action-reward tuples are loaded
from an ofﬂine data stored and pushed from online real
robot collection (see Sec. 5). Bellman update jobs sam-
ple transitions and generate training examples, while
training workers update the Q-function parameters.Our closed-loop vision-based control frame-
work is based on a general formulation of
robotic manipulation as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP)5. At each time step, the pol-
icy observes the image from the robot’s camera
(see Fig. 2) and chooses a gripper command, as
discussed in Section 5. This task formulation is
general and could in principle be applied to a
wide range of robotic manipulation tasks. The
grasping task is deﬁned simply by providing a
reward to the learner during data collection: a
successful grasp results in a reward of 1, and
a failed grasp a reward of 0. A grasp is con-
sidered successful if the robot holds an object
above a certain height at the end of the episode.
The framework of MDPs provides a general
and powerful formalism for such decision-
making problems, but learning in this framework can be challenging. Generalization requires di-
verse data, but recollecting experience on a wide range of objects after every policy update is im-
5While a partially observed (POMDP) formulation would be most general, we assume that the current ob-
servation provides all necessary information. In practice, the resulting policy still exhibits moderate robustness
to occlusions, and a more general extension to recurrent policies and Q-functions would be straightforward.
3
practical, ruling out on-policy algorithms. Instead, we devise a scalable off-policy reinforcement
learning framework based around a continuous generalization of Q-learning. While actor-critic al-
gorithms are a popular approach in the continuous action setting, we found that a more stable and
scalable alternative is to train only a Q-function, and induce a policy implicitly by maximizing this
Q-function using stochastic optimization. We describe the resulting algorithm, which we call QT-
Opt, in Section 4, and describe its instantiation for robotic grasping in Section 5. To handle the large
datasets and networks in our approach, we devise a distributed collection and training system that
asynchronously updates target values, collects on-policy data, reloads off-policy data from past ex-
periences, and trains the network on both data streams within a distributed optimization framework
(see Fig. 3).
4 Scalable Reinforcement Learning with QT-Opt
In this section, we describe the reinforcement learning algorithm that we use for our closed-loop
vision-based grasping method. The algorithm is a continuous action version of Q-learning adapted
for scalable learning and optimized for stability, to make it feasible to handle large amounts of
off-policy image data for complex tasks like grasping.
4.1 Reinforcement Learning and Q-Learning
We ﬁrst review the fundamentals of reinforcement learning and Q-learning, which we build on to
derive our algorithm. We will use s2S to denote the state, which in our case will include image
observations (see Appendix D for details). a2A denotes the action, which will correspond to robot
arm motion and gripper command. At each time step t, the algorithm chooses an action, transitions
to a new state, and receives a reward r(st;at). The goal in RL is to recover a policy that selects
actions to maximize the total expected reward. One way to acquire such an optimal policy is to ﬁrst
solve for the optimal Q-function, which is sometimes referred to as the state-action value function.
The Q-function speciﬁes the expected reward that will be received after taking some action ain
some state s, and the optimal Q-function speciﬁes this value for the optimal policy. In practice,
we aim to learn parameterized Q-functions Q(s;a), wheremight denote the weights in a neural
network. We can learn the optimal Q-function by minimizing the Bellman error, given by
E() =E(s;a;s0)p(s;a;s0)[D(Q(s;a);QT(s;a;s0))]; (1)
whereQT(s;a;s0) =r(s;a) +V(s0)is atarget value , andDis some divergence metric. We
use the cross-entropy function for D, since total returns are bounded in [0;1], which we found to
be more stable than the standard squared difference (see Appendix C). The expectation is taken
under the distribution over all previously observed transitions, and V(s0)is a target value. In
our implementation, we use two target networks [15, 30, 31] to improve stability, by maintain-
ing two lagged versions of the parameter vector ,1and2, where 1is the exponential mov-
ing averaged version of with an averaging constant of 0.9999, and 2is a lagged version of
1, which is lagged by about 6000 gradient steps. We then compute the target value according
toV(s0) = mini=1;2Qi(s0;arg max a0Q1(s0;a0)). This corresponds to a combination of Polyak
averaging [32, 33] and clipped double Q-learning [34, 35, 36], and we discuss this design decision
further in Appendix C. Once the Q-function is learned, the policy can be recovered according to
(s) = arg max aQ1(s;a). Practical implementations of this method collect samples from envi-
ronment interaction and then perform off-policy training on all samples collected so far [15, 30, 31].
For large-scale learning problems of the sort tackled in this work, a parallel asynchronous version of
this procedure substantially improves our ability to scale up this process, as discussed in Section 4.3.
4.2 QT-Opt for Stable Continuous-Action Q-Learning
Q-learning with deep neural network function approximators provides a simple and practical scheme
for RL with image observations, and is amenable to straightforward parallelization. However, incor-
porating continuous actions, such as continuous gripper motion in our grasping application, poses a
challenge for this approach. Prior work has sought to address this by using a second network that
amortizes the maximization [15, 16], or constraining the Q-function to be convex in a, making it
easy to maximize analytically [31, 37]. Unfortunately, the former class of methods are notoriously
unstable [18], which makes it problematic for large-scale RL tasks where running hyperparameter
4
sweeps is prohibitively expensive. Action-convex value functions are a poor ﬁt for complex manip-
ulation tasks such as grasping, where the Q-function is far from convex in the input. For example,
the Q-value may be high for actions that reach toward objects, but low for the gaps between objects.
We therefore propose a simple and practical alternative that maintains the generality of non-convex
Q-functions while avoiding the need for a second maximizer network. The image sand action a
are inputs into our network, and the arg max in Equation (1) is evaluated with a stochastic opti-
mization algorithm that can handle non-convex and multimodal optimization landscapes, similarly
to [19] and [20]. Let 1(s)be the policy implicitly induced by the Q-function Q1(s;a). We can
recover Equation (1) by substituting the optimal policy 1(s) = arg max aQ1(s;a)in place of
thearg max argument to the target Q-function. In our algorithm, which we call QT-Opt, 1(s)
is instead evaluated by running a stochastic optimization over a, usingQ1(s;a)as the objective
value. We use the cross-entropy method (CEM) to perform this optimization, which is easy to par-
allelize and moderately robust to local optima for low-dimensional problems [38]. CEM is a simple
derivative-free optimization algorithm that samples a batch of Nvalues at each iteration, ﬁts a Gaus-
sian distribution to the best M < N of these samples, and then samples the next batch of Nfrom
that Gaussian. In our implementation, we use N= 64 andM= 6, and perform two iterations of
CEM. This is used both to compute targets at training time, and to choose actions in the real world.
4.3 Distributed Asynchronous QT-Opt
Learning vision based policies with reinforcement learning that generalizes over new scenes and
objects requires large amounts of diverse data, in the same way that learning to generalize on com-
plex vision tasks with supervised learning requires large datasets. For the grasping task in our
experiments, we collected over 580k grasps over the course of several weeks across 7 robots. To
effectively train on such large and diverse RL dataset, we develop a distributed, asynchronous im-
plementation of QT-Opt. Fig. 3 summarizes the system. Transitions are stored in a distributed replay
buffer database, which both loads historical data from disk and can accept online data from live on-
going experiments across multiple robots. The data in this buffer is continually labeled with target
Q-values by using a set of 1000 “Bellman updater” jobs, which carry out the CEM optimization
procedure using the current target network, and then store the labeled samples in a second train-
ing buffer, which operates as a ring buffer. One consequence of this asynchronous procedure is
that some samples in the training buffer are labeled with lagged versions of the Q-network. This is
discussed in more detail in the supplement, in Appendix F.4. Training workers pull labeled transi-
tions from the training buffer randomly and use them to update the Q-function. We use 10 training
workers, each of which compute gradients which are sent asynchronously to parameter servers. We
found empirically that a large number of gradient steps (up to 15M) were needed to train an effective
Q-function due to the complexity of the task and large size of the dataset and model. Full details of
the system design are provided in Appendix F.
5 Dynamic Vision-Based Grasping
In this section, we discuss how QT-Opt can be applied to enable dynamic vision-based grasping.
An illustration of our grasping setup is shown in Fig. 1. The task requires a policy that can locate
an object, position it for grasping (potentially by performing pre-grasp manipulations), pick up the
object, potentially regrasping as needed, raise the object, and then signal that the grasp is complete
to terminate the episode. To enable self-supervised grasp labeling in the real world, the reward only
indicates whether or not an object was successfully picked up. This represents a fully end-to-end
approach to grasping: no prior knowledge about objects, physics, or motion planning is provided to
the model aside from the knowledge that it can extract autonomously from the data.
MDP for grasping. The state observation s2S includes the robot’s current camera observa-
tion, an RGB image with a resolution of 472x472, recorded from an over-the-shoulder monocular
camera (see Fig. 1). We also found it beneﬁcial to include the current status of the gripper in the
state, which is a binary indicator of whether the gripper is open or closed, as well as the vertical
position of the gripper relative to the ﬂoor (see comparisons in Appendix C). The action a2A
consists of a vector in Cartesian space t2R3indicating the desired change in the gripper posi-
tion, a change in azimuthal angle encoded via a sine-cosine encoding r2R2, binary gripper open
and close commands gopenandgclose, and a termination command ethat ends the episode, such that
a= (t;r;gopen;gclose;e). Full details of the grasping MDP formulation are provided in Appendix D.
5
Reward function. The reward is 1 at the end of the episode if the gripper contains an object and
is above a certain height, and 0 otherwise. Success is determined by using a background subtraction
test after dropping the picked object, as discussed in Appendix D.4. Note that this type of delayed
and sparse reward function is generally quite challenging for reinforcement learning systems, but it
is also the most practical reward function for automated self-supervision. To encourage the robot to
grasp more quickly, we also provide a small penalty r(st;at) = 0:05for all time steps prior to
termination, when the model either emits the termination action or exceeds the maximum number
of time steps (20). This penalty may in principle result in target values outside of [0;1], though we
found empirically that this does not happen.
Q-Function representation. The Q-function Q1(s;a)is represented in our system by a large
convolutional neural network with 1.2M parameters, where the image is provided as an input into
the bottom of the convolutional stack, and the action, gripper status, and distance to ﬂoor are fed
into the middle of the stack. The full neural network architecture is discussed in Appendix E.
Data collection. In order to enable our model to learn generalizable strategies that can pick up
new objects, perform pre-grasp manipulation, and handle dynamic disturbances with vision-based
feedback, we must train it on a sufﬁciently large and diverse set of objects. Collecting such data
in a single on-policy training run would be impractical. Our off-policy QT-Opt algorithm makes it
possible to pool experience from multiple robots and multiple experiments. The full dataset used to
train our ﬁnal model was collected over the course of four months, with a total of about 800 robot
hours. This data was collected during multiple separate experiments, and each experiment reused
the data from the previous one. This reduces our ability to provide rigidly controlled experimental
results in the real-world system, but we provide more rigidly controlled results in simulation in
the supplement, in Appendix C. Since a completely random initial policy would produce a very
low success with such an unconstrained action space, we use a weak scripted exploration policy
to bootstrap data collection. This policy is randomized, but biased toward reasonable grasps, and
achieves a success rate around 15-30%. We switched to using the learned QT-Opt policy once it
reached a success rate of 50%. The scripted policy is described in the supplementary material, in
Appendix B. Data was collected with 7 LBR IIWA robots, with 4-10 training objects per robot.
The objects were replaced every 4 hours during business hours, and left unattended at night and on
weekends. The objects used during testing were distinct from those in the training data.
6 Experimental Results
Our experiments evaluate our learned closed-loop vision-based grasping system to answer the fol-
lowing research questions: (1) How does our method perform, quantitatively, on new objects that
were never seen during training? (2) How does its performance compare to a previously proposed
self-supervised grasping system that does not explicitly optimize for long-horizon grasp success?
(3) What types of manipulation strategies does our method adopt, and does it carry out meaningful,
goal-directed pre-grasp manipulations? (4) How do the various design choices in our method affect
its performance? The ﬁrst two questions are addressed through a set of rigorous real-world quan-
titative experiments, which we discuss in Section 6.1, question (3) is addressed through qualitative
experiments, which are discussed in Section 6.2 and shown in the supplementary video and online,
and the last question is addressed through a detailed set of ablation studies in both simulation and
the real world, which are discussed in Appendix C and A. The experiments in the appendices also
study the impact of dataset size and off-policy training on ﬁnal performance.
6.1 Quantitative Performance Evaluation
In this section, we present a quantitative evaluation of our grasping system. The physical setup for
each robot is shown in Fig. 1 (left): the robots are tasked with grasping objects in a bin, using an
over-the-shoulder RGB camera and no other sensing.6We use two separate evaluation protocols,
which use challenging objects that were not seen at training time. In the ﬁrst protocol, each of the
7 robots make 102 grasp attempts on a set of test objects. The grasp attempts last for up to 20 time
steps each, and any grasped object is deposited back into the bin. Although a policy may choose to
grasp the same object multiple times, we found in practice that each robot made grasp attempts on
a variety of objects, without ﬁxating on a single one. However, to control for potential confounding
6Though some of the ﬁgures show a wrist-mounted camera, this camera is not used in the experiments.
6
Method Dataset TestBin emptying
ﬁrst 10 ﬁrst 20 ﬁrst 30
QT-Opt (ours) 580k off-policy +28k on-policy 96% 88% 88% 76%
Levine et al. [27] 900k grasps from Levine et al. [27] 78% 76% 72% 72%
QT-Opt (ours) 580k off-policy grasps only 87%
Levine et al. [27] 400k grasps from our dataset 67%
Table 1: Quantitative results in terms of grasp success rate on test objects. Policies are evaluated with object
replacement (test) and without (bin emptying), with the latter showing success rates on the ﬁrst 10, 20, and 30
grasps. The variant of our method that uses on-policy joint ﬁnetuning has a failure rate more than four times
lower than prior work on the test set, while using substantially fewer grasp attempts for training. The variant
that only uses off-policy training also substantially exceeds the performance of the prior method.
effects due to replacement, we also conducted experiments with a second protocol, which we refer
to as bin emptying. Here, a single robot unloads a cluttered bin ﬁlled with 28 test objects, using 30
grasp attempts. This is repeated 5 times. Grasp success is reported over the ﬁrst 10, 20, and 30 grasp
attempts, corresponding to grasps on increasingly difﬁcult objects.
The performance of our method is shown in Table 1. The results show both a variant of our method
that is trained entirely using off-policy data, without any additional data collection from the latest
policy, as well as the performance after joint ﬁnetuning with additional on-policy data, which is
collected simultaneously with the policy training (details of the joint ﬁnetuning procedure in Ap-
pendix F.3). The success rate of our method in both cases is very high. Effective off-policy training
is valuable as it allows for rapid iteration on hyperparameters and architecture design without any
data collection. However, additional on-policy joint ﬁnetuning consistently provides a quantiﬁable
increase in performance with only about 28,000 additional grasps, reaching 96% grasp success.
Although the on-policy dataset does not observe the same data diversity as seen in the off-policy
dataset, it likely affords the policy a kind of “hard negative mining” mechanism, letting it quickly
correct erroneous and over-optimistic extrapolations. Further ablations are discussed in Appendix A.
To compare our method to prior work, we evaluated the technique proposed by Levine et al. [27].
This prior method is also self-supervised, and previously attained good results on a similar visual
grasping setup. This prior method does not reason about long-horizon rewards: although it can be
used in closed-loop, the policy greedily optimizes for grasp success at the next grasp, does not con-
trol the opening and closing of the gripper, and does not reason about pregrasp manipulation. Since
the format of the data for the two methods is different due to the different action representations, we
compare to two versions of this prior approach: a variant that is trained on all of the data described
by Levine et al. [27], and a variant that adapts the same data used for our method, discarding grasp
attempts where the gripper was not closed. The comparison in Table 1 indicates a very large gap in
performance between our method and both variants of the prior approach. On the bin emptying ex-
periment, our method emptied the bin in 30 grasps or less in 2 of the 5 trials, while the prior method
emptied the bin in 1 of the 5 trials. The lower success rate for 30 grasps is due to the policy trying to
grasp the last few objects, which are usually very small and often get stuck in an unreachable corner
of the bin. Examples are shown in Appendix A.
6.2 Analysis of Grasping Strategies with Qualitative Experiments
Our QT-Opt grasping policy has a success rate of 96% on previously unseen test objects. What types
of strategies does this policy adopt? In contrast to most grasping systems, our method performs gen-
eral closed-loop control with image observations, and can choose to reposition, open, or close the
gripper at any time. This ﬂexibility, combined with training for long-horizon success with reinforce-
ment learning, enables it to perform behaviors that are usually not observed with standard grasping
systems. We encourage the reader to watch the supplementary video, as well as the extended video,
both provided at https://goo.gl/ykQn6g , and discuss some examples here. Notably, all of these
examples emerge automatically from training the policy to optimize grasp success.
Singulation and pregrasp manipulation. Since our policies optimizes for the success of the en-
tire episode, they can carry out pregrasp manipulations that reposition objects to make them easier
to grasp. In Fig. 4 (a), we show an example object singulation sequence performed by the learned
policy on a previously unseen blocks puzzle, and in Fig. 4 (b), we show an example where the policy
chooses to knock down a ketchup bottle to make it easier to pick up.
Regrasping. The policy can open and close the gripper at any time, which allows it to detect early
signs of an unstable grasp and regrasp the object more securely. In Fig. 4 (c), we show examples
where the policy repeatedly regrasps a slippery object on the ﬂoor, while in Fig. 4 (d), we show an
7
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 4: Eight grasps from the QT-Opt policy, illustrating some of the strategies discovered by our method:
pregrasp manipulation (a, b), grasp readjustment (c, d), grasping dynamic objects and recovery from perturba-
tions (e, f), and grasping in clutter (g, h). See discussion in the text and Appendix A.
example where the object slips out of the gripper during the load phase, and the policy repositions
the gripper for a more secure grasp.
Handling disturbances and dynamic objects. The reactive policy can also grasp objects that
move dynamically during the grasping process. In Fig. 4 (e), we show examples where the policy
attempts to pick up a ball, which rolls out of the gripper forcing the robot to follow. In Fig. 4 (f), we
also show examples where the object is intentionally pushed out of the gripper during grasping. The
policy is still able to correct and grasp another object successfully.
Grasping in clutter. Although the training data included no more than ten objects at a time, the
policy can still grasp in dense clutter, as shown in Fig. 4 (g).
Failure cases. Although the policy was usually successful, we did observe a few failure cases.
Especially in dense clutter, the policy was sometimes prone to regrasp repeatedly among cluttered
objects, as shown in Fig. 4 (h). While this strategy often does produce a successful grasp, it is
somewhat time consuming and not as goal-directed as the behavior observed in less cluttered scenes.
7 Discussion and Future Work
We presented a framework for scalable robotic reinforcement learning with raw sensory inputs such
as images, based on an algorithm called QT-Opt, a distributed optimization framework, and a combi-
nation of off-policy and on-policy training. We apply this framework to the task of grasping, learning
closed-loop vision-based policies that attain a high success rate on previously unseen objects, and
exhibit sophisticated and intelligent closed-loop behavior, including singulation and pregrasp manip-
ulation, regrasping, and dynamic responses to disturbances. All of these behaviors emerge automat-
ically from optimizing the grasp success probability via QT-Opt. Although our policies are trained
on a large amount of robot experience (580k real-world grasps), all of this experience is collected
autonomously with minimal human intervention, and the amount of data needed is substantially
lower than comparable prior self-supervised techniques (e.g., [27]). Our results demonstrate that
reinforcement learning with vision-based inputs can scale to large datasets and very large models,
and can enable policies that generalize effectively for complex real-world tasks such as grasping.
Our framework is generic with respect to the task, and extending the approach to other manipulation
skills would be an exciting direction for future work.
8
Acknowledgments
We would like to give special thanks to I ˜naki Gonzalo and John-Michael Burke for overseeing the
robot operations, and Chelsea Finn, Timothy Lillicrap, and Arun Nair for valuable discussions.
References
[1] J. Peters and S. Schaal. Reinforcement learning of motor skills with policy gradients. Neural
Networks , 21(4):682 – 697, 2008. ISSN 0893-6080. Robotics and Neuroscience.
[2] M. Kalakrishnan, L. Righetti, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal. Learning Force Control Policies for
Compliant Manipulation. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems , 2011.
[3] A. Yahya, A. Li, M. Kalakrishnan, Y . Chebotar, and S. Levine. Collective robot reinforce-
ment learning with distributed asynchronous guided policy search. In IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2017.
[4] A. Ghadirzadeh, A. Maki, D. Kragic, and M. Bjrkman. Deep predictive policy training us-
ing reinforcement learning. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems , 2017.
[5] A. Zeng, S. Song, S. Welker, J. Lee, A. Rodriguez, and T. Funkhouser. Learning Synergies
between Pushing and Grasping with Self-supervised Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.09956 , 2018.
[6] D. Morrison et. al. Cartman: The low-cost Cartesian Manipulator that won the Amazon
Robotics Challenge. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2018.
[7] J. Mahler, M. Matl, X. Liu, A. Li, D. V . Gealy, and K. Goldberg. Dex-Net 3.0: Computing
Robust Robot Suction Grasp Targets in Point Clouds using a New Analytic Model and Deep
Learning. CoRR , abs/1709.06670, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.06670 .
[8] A. ten Pas, M. Gualtieri, K. Saenko, and R. Platt. Grasp Pose Detection in Point Clouds. The
International Journal of Robotics Research , 36(13-14):1455–1473, 2017.
[9] N. Chavan-Daﬂe and A. Rodriguez. Stable Prehensile Pushing: In-Hand Manipulation with
Alternating Sticking Contacts. In IEEE Intl Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2018.
[10] J. Bohg, A. Morales, T. Asfour, and D. Kragic. Data-Driven Grasp Synthesis A Survey. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics , 30(2):289–309, 2014.
[11] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning . MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, USA, 1st edition, 1998. ISBN 0262193981.
[12] G. Tesauro. TD-Gammon, a Self-Teaching Backgammon Program, Achieves Master-Level
Play. Neural Computation , March 1994.
[13] M. C. Machado, M. G. Bellemare, E. Talvitie, J. Veness, M. J. Hausknecht, and M. Bowling.
Revisiting the Arcade Learning Environment: Evaluation Protocols and Open Problems for
General Agents. CoRR , abs/1709.06009, 2017.
[14] G. Brockman, V . Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba.
Openai gym, 2016.
[15] R. Hafner and M. Riedmiller. Reinforcement learning in feedback control. Machine Learning ,
84(1-2), 2011.
[16] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y . Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra.
Continuous Control with Deep Reinforcement Learning. CoRR , abs/1509.02971, 2015. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02971 .
[17] Y . Duan, X. Chen, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, and P. Abbeel. Benchmarking Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning for Continuous Control. In Intl Conference on Machine Learning , 2016.
[18] P. Henderson, R. Islam, P. Bachman, J. Pineau, D. Precup, and D. Meger. Deep Reinforcement
Learning that Matters. CoRR , 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.06560 .
[19] G. Kahn, A. Villaﬂor, B. Ding, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Self-Supervised Deep Reinforcement
Learning with Generalized Computation Graphs for Robot Navigation. In IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2018.
[20] D. Quillen, E. Jang, O. Nachum, C. Finn, J. Ibarz, and S. Levine. Deep Reinforcement Learn-
ing for Vision-Based Robotic Grasping: A Simulated Comparative Evaluation of Off-Policy
9
Methods. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2018.
[21] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel. End-to-end Training of Deep Visuomotor Poli-
cies. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(39), 2016.
[22] J. Weisz and P. K. Allen. Pose Error Robust Grasping from Contact Wrench Space Metrics. In
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2012.
[23] I. Lenz, H. Lee, and A. Saxena. Deep Learning for Detecting Robotic Grasps. The Interna-
tional Journal of Robotics Research , 34(4-5):705–724, 2015.
[24] K. Yu and A. Rodriguez. Realtime State Estimation with Tactile and Visual sensing. Applica-
tion to Planar Manipulation. In IEEE Intl Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2018.
[25] U. Viereck, A. ten Pas, K. Saenko, and R. Platt. Learning a visuomotor controller for real
world robotic grasping using simulated depth images. In CoRL , 2017.
[26] K. Hausman, Y . Chebotar, O. Kroemer, G. S. Sukhatme, and S. Schaal. Regrasping using
Tactile Perception and Supervised Policy Learning. In AAAI Symposium on Interactive Multi-
Sensory Object Perception for Embodied Agents , 2017.
[27] S. Levine, P. Pastor, A. Krizhevsky, and D. Quillen. Learning hand-eye coordination for
robotic grasping with large-scale data collection. In International Symposium on Experimental
Robotics , 2016.
[28] L. Pinto and A. Gupta. Supersizing self-supervision: Learning to grasp from 50K tries and 700
robot hours. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2016.
[29] D. Morrison, P. Corke, and J. Leitner. Closing the Loop for Robotic Grasping: A Real-time,
Generative Grasp Synthesis Approach. In Robotics: Science and Systems , 2018.
[30] V . Mnih et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518(7540):
529–533, 2015.
[31] S. Gu, T. Lillicrap, I. Sutskever, and S. Levine. Continuous Deep Q-learning with Model-based
Acceleration. In Proceedings of Intl Conference on Machine Learning , 2016.
[32] B. T. Polyak and A. B. Juditsky. Acceleration of stochastic approximation by averaging. SIAM
Journal on Control and Optimization , 30(4):838–855, 1992.
[33] T. Lillicrap, J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y . Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra. Con-
tinuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2016.
[34] H. V . Hasselt. Double Q-learning. In J. D. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor, R. S.
Zemel, and A. Culotta, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2010.
[35] H. v. Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver. Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double Q-Learning.
InAAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2016.
[36] S. Fujimoto, H. van Hoof, and D. Meger. Addressing Function Approximation Error in Actor-
Critic Methods. CoRR , 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09477 .
[37] B. Amos, L. Xu, and J. Z. Kolter. Input convex neural networks. In International Conference
on Machine Learning , volume 70, pages 146–155, 2017.
[38] R. Rubinstein and D. Kroese. The Cross-Entropy Method . Springer-Verlag, 2004.
[39] E. Coumans and Y . Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games, robotics
and machine learning. http://pybullet.org , 2016–2018.
[40] A. X. Chang, T. A. Funkhouser, L. J. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q. Huang, Z. Li, S. Savarese,
M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su, J. Xiao, L. Yi, and F. Yu. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model
repository. CoRR , abs/1512.03012, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03012 .
[41] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Re-
ducing Internal Covariate Shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2015.
[42] A. Stooke and P. Abbeel. Accelerated Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning. CoRR ,
abs/1803.02811, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02811 .
[43] L. Espeholt, H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V . Mnih, T. Ward, Y . Doron, V . Firoiu,
T. Harley, I. Dunning, S. Legg, and K. Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA: scalable distributed deep-
rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. CoRR , abs/1802.01561, 2018. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.01561 .
[44] A. Nair, P. Srinivasan, S. Blackwell, C. Alcicek, R. Fearon, A. D. Maria, V . Panneershelvam,
M. Suleyman, C. Beattie, S. Petersen, S. Legg, V . Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Silver. Mas-
sively parallel methods for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR , abs/1507.04296, 2015. URL
10
http://arxiv.org/abs/1507.04296 .
[45] D. Horgan, J. Quan, D. Budden, G. Barth-Maron, M. Hessel, H. van Hasselt, and D. Silver.
Distributed Prioritized Experience Replay. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations , 2018.
[46] J. Dean, G. S. Corrado, R. Monga, K. Chen, M. Devin, Q. V . Le, M. Z. Mao, M. Ranzato,
A. Senior, P. Tucker, K. Yang, and A. Y . Ng. Large scale distributed deep networks. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2012.
[47] M. Abadi et. al. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015.
URL https://www.tensorflow.org/ .
11
A Real World Ablation Experiments: State, Action, and Reward Design
After prototyping ideas in our simulated setup, we take the best parameters discussed in Appendix C,
and repeat those experiments in the real setup, to verify the same parameters carry over across
domains. Since real-world ﬁnetuning takes considerable robot time, all of these experiments were
conducted with entirely off-policy training using a ﬁxed dataset of 580k grasps. The results are
therefore in absolute terms worse than the ﬁnal results of our best policy, but are still useful for
understanding the relative tradeoffs of various design choices.
State representation and its effects. Echoing results discussed in Appendix C we found that a
rich state representation greatly impacts real robot performance. Matching simulated experiments,
providing the image, gripper status, and height to bottom of the bin performs better than other repre-
sentations. These experiments indicate that while hand-eye coordination can in principle be ﬁgured
out purely from the image observation, explicitly adding domain-speciﬁc state features improves
performance. We ﬁnd it very important that such low dimensional state features can be seamlessly
integrated into our model, resulting in better performance and data efﬁciency. All models are trained
off-policy for 2.5M steps, with discount 0:9and no reward penalty.
State Representation Performance
Image only 53%
Image + gripper status 58%
Image + gripper status +
height70%
Table 2: Off-policy ablation over state representation.
Discount and Reward Deﬁnition To encourage faster grasps, we experimented with decreasing
discount and adding a small reward penalty at each timestep. Again, matching sim results, a reward
penalty did better than decreasing the discount factor. All models are trained off-policy on the same
dataset for 2.5M steps.
State Representation Discount Factor Reward Penalty Performance
Image only 0.9 0 53%
Image only 0.7 0 28%
Image only 0.9 -0.05 63%
Table 3: Off-policy ablation over discount and reward.
Learned Termination We compare a task-speciﬁc scripted termination condition with a task-
agnostic termination action learned by the policy. Details of the scripted termination and learned
termination conditions are in the Appendix D.4. The learned termination condition performs better
in the off-policy case and on-policy case.
Termination Condition Training Regime Performance
Automatic off-policy 81%
Learned off-policy 87%
Automatic on-policy joint ﬁne-
tuning95%
Learned on-policy joint ﬁne-
tuning96%
Table 4: Off-policy and on-policy ablation of termination condition.
Quantitative experiments The performance of our algorithm is evaluated empirically in a set of
grasping experiments. As discussed in Section 6.1 we follow two experimentation protocols. In one
set of the experiments we let 7 robots execute 102 grasps each and then average grasp success. See
results in column three of Table 1. After a successful trial, the object is randomly dropped back into
the bin. In a second protocol we place 28 objects into a bin and let the robot perform 30 grasps
without object replacement. This time successfully grasped objects are placed into a spare basket.
For the bin unloading protocol we report success rates on the ﬁrst 10 / 20 / 30 grasps to report on
increasingly difﬁcult objects remaining in the bin over the unloading process. As the unloading
process progresses, large objects tend to be grasped ﬁrst and small objects are grasped last. The
12
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5: Illustrations of the bin emptying experiment (a). The (a, right) shows a very small object getting stuck
in the corner and requiring a few attempts to get grasped. The test objects for the bin emptying experiment (b,
left) and grasping with replacement experiment (b, right). Note that the objects range greatly in size and
appearance, and many are exceedingly difﬁcult to grasp due to small size, complex shapes, and varied material
properties. Sequence (c) illustrates a grasp on the legs of a toy octopus, getting positive visual feedback and
resulting in episode termination by the policy. During further ascent, the octopus slips out of the gripper, and
the grasp is labeled as a failure. This is not a principled limitation of our method, as we could have terminated
an episode at a larger height to get more robust feedback. Robot’s observation Itis shown in (c).
policy is required to localize the small objects and then make a grasp. The ability of our policy to
localize small objects in a very sparse scene is learned solely from data, and was not hand tuned.
The test sets, shown in Fig. 5 (b), consist of objects that pose a variety of challenges for grasping.
They range in size from very small to larger, heavier objects. They vary in appearance, and include
objects that are translucent and reﬂective. They include objects with highly non-convex shapes, soft
and deformable parts, and parts that are inherently unsuitable for grasping (such as the bristles on a
brush). In analyzing the failure cases, we noticed the following patterns. In the test with replacement,
many of the failed grasps were on the soft octopus toy (Fig. 5 (c)), where the robot would lift the
octopus successfully by one of the tentacles, but it would slip out and fall back into the bin after
lifting. Other failures were caused by the small round objects rolling into the corners of the bin,
where they were difﬁcult to reach. Since we impose hard bounds on the workspace to prevent the
robot from colliding with the environment, in many of these cases it was actually impossible for the
robot to grasp the object successfully, regardless of the policy. In the bin emptying experiment, we
found that many of the failures were due to the small black lock (Fig. 5 (a, right)) getting stuck in
the corner of the bin, where it could not be grasped, resulting in multiple sequential failed attempts.
Emergent grasping behaviors We presented a challenging task of grasping a toy puzzle which
needs to be broken down into pieces before any individual part could be grasped, as otherwise the
puzzle will not ﬁt into the gripper, see Fig. 4 (a). This puzzle was not seen at training time. We
treat grasp success as a proxy for frequency and efﬁciency of a pregrasp manipulation, since the
ﬁrst block cannot be grasped a without pregrasp manipulation. After every grasp, we reassemble
the puzzle and place it at a different location. We compare our best baseline based on Levine et al.
[27] to QT-Opt. The QT-Opt model succeeds in 19 out of 24 grasps (79%), while the prior method
succeeds in 13 out of 24 grasps (54%).
13
In the second evaluation, we attempt grasps on a tennis ball, see Fig. 4 (e). The ﬁrst time the tennis
ball is between the gripper ﬁngers, we push the tennis ball out of the way. The ball cannot be
grasped unless the model reacts to the new tennis ball position. The QT-Opt model succeeds in 28
of 38 grasps (74%). The prior model succeeds in 4 out of 25 grasps (16%).
This suggests that our policy learned better proactive and reactive behaviors than our baseline.
Clipped Double Q-Learning We ﬁnd that using Clipped Double Q-Learning [36] results in faster
convergence in simulated experiments (Figure 9) and is crucial for good performance in real exper-
iments (Table 5). Experiments used the scripted termination.
Q-learning Method Performance
Double Q-learning 63%
Clipped Double Q-learning 81%
Table 5: Off-policy performance with and without clipped Double-Q Learning.
Data efﬁciency As discussed in Section 5 we collected 580k grasp attempts across 7 robots with a
total of about 800 robot hours. Since we saved collected data on disk, we can study performance of a
policy with less off-policy data. A dataset of 320k grasp attempts was generated by using data from
the ﬁrst 440 robot hours of data collection. Table 6 shows performance of off-policy training, using
the best model conﬁguration. With only 55% of the original dataset, we reached 78% grasp success,
the same performance as our best supervised learning baseline, but using one third the number of
grasps, and half the number of transitions. Further joint ﬁnetuning would likely yield a ﬁnal policy
that also reaches 96% grasp success, with higher data efﬁciency but more on-robot joint ﬁnetuning
time.
Dataset Size Performance
580k grasps 87%
320k grasps 78%
Table 6: Data efﬁciency.
B Exploration and Dataset Bootstrapping
As is standard in Q-learning, we evaluate using one policy (evaluation policy) and collect training
data with a different policy (exploration policy). Our evaluation policy evalchooses each action
by maximizing the Q-function value using our QT-Opt algorithm described in Section 4.2. For data
collection, we used two different exploration policies scripted;noisy at different stages of training.
During the early stages of training, a policy that takes random actions would achieve reward too
rarely to learn from, since the grasping task is a multi-stage problem and reward is sparse. This was
indeed what we observed during early experimentation. For this reason, we collect our initial data for
training using a scripted policy scripted that successfully grasps 15-30% of the time. The scripted
simpliﬁes the multi-step exploration of the problem by randomly choosing an (x;y)coordinate
above the table, lowering the open gripper to table level in a few random descent steps, closing the
gripper, then returning to the original height in a few ascent steps.
We compared initial data collection with scripted vs. initial data collection with prior , a grasping
model based on Levine et al. [27]. In our real-world experiments, we used prior , but in a simulated
comparison, we found that initializing training with either policy leads to the same ﬁnal performance
and data efﬁciency. The data generated by either policy has similar distributional properties, as
discussed in Appendix C.1, which is sufﬁcient to bootstrap learning.
During the later stages of training, we switch to data collection with noisy . This exploration policy
uses epsilon-greedy exploration to trade off between choosing exploration actions or actions that
maximize the Q-function estimate. The policy noisy chooses a random action with probability
= 20% , otherwise the greedy action is chosen. To choose a random action, noisy samples a
pose change t;rfrom a Gaussian with probability 75%, a toggle gripper action gopen;gclosewith
probability 17%, and an episode termination ewith probability 8%.
14
C Simulated Experiments: Dataset Size, Off-Policy Training, MDP Design
Figure 6: Bullet
Physics simulated
environment.Robot experiments at large scale are excessively more time-consuming,
complex, and uncertain than experimentation in a simulated environment.
We made extensive use of simulation for prototyping and ablation studies
of our methods.
Our simulation environment is based on the Bullet Physics simulator [39]
and mimics the setup shown in Fig. 2. The simulated environment uses the
conﬁguration of the real Kuka IIWA arm, a similar looking bin, and a simu-
lated over-the-shoulder camera. We used object models from the ShapeNet
dataset [40], scaled down to graspable sizes. Using our scalable distributed
learning infrastructure (as discussed in Section 4), we were able to gener-
ate data with up to 1,000 virtual robots running in parallel, and conduct a
large scale experiment within a few hours. Both simulation and real used
the same input modality, neural net architecture, and method of robotic con-
trol. Simulation was only used for prototyping, and all real world policies
used only real data. We found that real world learning was generally much
harder in terms of data requirements and time needed to train a good model, due to higher visual
diversity, real world physics, and unmodeled properties of the real robot.
There are many parameters in our system which impact the ﬁnal performance, data efﬁciency, gen-
eralization and emergence of rich behaviours. We split the factors into three large groups: QT-Opt
speciﬁc parameters, grasping parameters, and data efﬁciency, which we discuss below.
QT-Opt speciﬁc parameters include hyperparameters for Polyak averaging and the method of
computing Bellman error. We found that 0:9999 was the best Polyak averaging constant, and Double
DQN performed better than Single DQN. Results are in Figure 7. Note that although asymptotic
performance is similar, the settings chosen seem to provide faster convergence and lower variance in
grasp success. The latter is important for real experiments, where it is costly to evaluate the policy
at multiple points. We also found that the cross-entropy loss performed better than the standard
squared difference loss.
0 500000 1000000 1500000 2000000
Training Steps (batch of 32)0.00.20.40.60.8Grasp Success RatePolyak Averaging Comparison (using Double DQN)
0.0
0.99
0.9999
(a)All values of Polyak averaging provide stable
training that reach similar performance, but higher
values seem to converge faster and have smoother
performance curves.
0 200000 400000 600000 800000 1000000 1200000 1400000 1600000 1800000
Training Steps (batch of 32)0.00.20.40.60.8Grasp Success RateDQN Comparison (using Polyak averaging 0.9999)
Single DQN
Double DQN(b)Double DQN outperforms Single DQN on our
task. Note that both are quite stable.
Figure 7: Comparison of Polyak averaging constants (a) and Single DQN vs Double DQN (b). Note these
experiments do not include clipped Double Q-learning.
Figure 9 compares Clipped Double DQN to standard Double DQN, showing Clipped Double DQN
does slightly better. Note that although the difference in sim was small, we found performance was
signiﬁcantly better in the real world off-policy setting (see Table 5). The simulated setup uses 60
simulated, on-policy robots, which suggests the primary gains of Clipped Double DQN come when
it is used with off-policy data.
Grasping parameters describe the task speciﬁc MDP design, i.e. state-action representations,
closed-loop control and data generation policies. We found that differences in state representation
as discussed in detail in Appendix D, greatly impacts performance. We compared models whose
state is either a) just an image observation of the scene or b) a richer state comprising an image,
15
Figure 8: Loss function comparison in simulation
Figure 9: Comparison of DQN methods. See Appendix F.4 for clipped Double DQN deﬁnition.
the gripper aperture and distance between the gripper and the ﬂoor. Next, we studied discount
factors and reward penalties. Finally, we compared a scripted episode stopping criterion to a learned
termination action. In these experiments, we use 60 simulated robots, using scripted policy for
the ﬁrst 120K gradient update steps, then switching to the noisy policy with = 0:2. These
exploration policies are explained in Appendix B. The grasp performance is evaluated continuously
and concurrently as training proceeds by running the evalpolicy on 100 separate simulated robots
and aggregating 700 grasps per policy for each model checkpoint.
State Termination
actionIntermediate
rewardDiscount
factorPerf. at
300K stepsPerf. at 1M
steps
Image+gripper
status+heightNo -0.05 0.9 75% 95%
No 0 0.9 68% 92%
No 0 0.7 50% 90%
Image only No -0.05 0.9 25% 81%
Image+gripper
status+heightYes -0.05 0.9 67% 94%
Table 7: Simulation studies for tuning grasping task parameters
The results in Table 7 show that richer state representation results in faster convergence and better
ﬁnal performance. A small reward penalty does much better than decreasing the discount factor.
Finally, giving the policy greater control over the episode termination yields performance on par
with the engineered termination condition.
We put special focus on the termination action: by letting the policy decide when to terminate, the
policy has more potential to keep trying a grasp until it is conﬁdent the grasp is stable. We argue
that explicitly learning a termination action would be beneﬁcial for many manipulation tasks, since
it makes the design of the MDP easier and it forces the policy to truly understand the goal of the
task.
16
Figure 10: Performance graphs of simulation studies for tuning grasping task parameters
Figure 11: (top row) The distribution of z-coordinate of the pose translation of actions selected by the ran-
domized scripted policy. The z-coordinate values are biased towards negative values during the ﬁrst few steps
on the descent phase of the episode, then biased towards positive values at later steps on the ascend phase.
Such a biased action distribution over states provides poor action space exploration and is insufﬁcient to learn
a good Q-Function. (bottom row) The z-coordinate of actions selected by a suboptimal QT-Opt policy. The
distribution is roughly centered around zero (red axis) at each step providing good action space exploration.
Data efﬁciency Interestingly, our algorithm is more data efﬁcient than the supervised learning
based algorithm from Levine et al. [27] work, achieving higher grasp success with fewer robots
continuously generating training data (see Table 8).
Name Sim Robots Success
QT-Opt (ours)30 88%
60 95%
Levine et al. [27]60 55%
280 71%
1000 85%
Table 8: Data efﬁciency comparison in simulation.
We argue that the algorithm from Levine et al. [27] is less data efﬁcient because it optimizes a
proxy objective of 1-step classiﬁcation accuracy, which values all data points equally. Our QT-Opt
policy values data points based on how they inﬂuence reward. This focuses optimization on pivotal
decision points that are very important to get right, such as learning when to close the gripper. Doing
so lets the model optimize grasp success more efﬁciently.
C.1 Effect of Off-Policy Training on Performance
17
Num. transitions
fromDscriptedNum. transitions
fromDexploreSuccess
300k 0k 20%
0k 300k 37%
150k 150k 86%
200k 260k 94%
Table 9: Off-policy performance in simulation on datasets
with different distributional properties of actions over statesIn principle Q-Learning can learn an op-
timal policy from off-policy data, as long
as the data is sufﬁciently diverse. Empiri-
cally we proved that indeed a decent pol-
icy can be trained from our ofﬂine dataset.
We are interested in answering the follow-
ing questions: what statistical properties
must the data distribution have, and which
exploration policies might give rise to that
distribution? To that end, we collected two
dataset in simulation. The Dscripted dataset was collected by running a randomized scripted pol-
icyscripted , discussed in Appendix B, which averaged 30% grasp success. The second dataset
Dexplore was collected by running a suboptimal QT-Opt policy evalwhich is also averaged 30%
grasp success. Table 9 shows off-policy performance on different amounts of data sampled from
Dscripted andDexplore . This experiment shows that given 300k transitions, it is impossible to learn
solely from the Dscripted data, or solely from the Dexplore data, but it is possible to learn with
data from both distributions. This shows the importance of collecting off-policy data from a mix of
policies with different behavior. The scripted is a special randomized scripted policy which sam-
ples actions in a very biased way towards successful grasps for initial bootstrapping. As a result, it
explores state-action space very poorly, yielding only speciﬁc greedy actions for certain states. In
contrast, a suboptimal evalmakes a lot of suboptimal actions thus resulting in good exploration of
the action space. Fig. 11 visualizes the distribution of the z-coordinate of the action translation in
the two datasets, showing that eval’s actions have less downward bias. We saw similar differences
in distributions over other components of the action, like the gripper action. In our real world ex-
periments, early policies had very poor success, as the data was coming primarily from scripted ,
hence resulting in poor exploration of the action space. However, once we collected enough sufﬁ-
ciently random data, we started getting much better grasp success. We expect this pattern to hold for
other real world tasks using QT-Opt: initial performance might be low, but continued data collection
should eventually give rise to an appropriately diverse data distribution resulting in a good policy.
D Grasping MDP: State Space, Action Space, and Reward Evaluation
The goal in designing the MDP is to provide a framework in which an agent may learn the nec-
essary hand-eye coordination to reach, grasp, and lift objects successfully. Our sensors include a
640x512 RGB camera and joint position sensors in arm and gripper. In the following we describe
representation of state, action and reward and discuss the stopping criterion of our grasping task.
D.1 Observation Space
To provide image observations Itthat capture maximal information about the state of the environ-
ment, we mounted the camera to the shoulder of the robot overlooking the entire workspace (see
Fig. 2). In practice, we also observed that our agent was able to learn more effectively when obser-
vations also include some proprioceptive state. Speciﬁcally, this state includes a binary open/closed
indicator of gripper aperture and the scalar height of the gripper above the bottom of the tray. The
full observation is be deﬁned as st= (It;gaperture;t;gheight;t). The model-input Itis a 472x472 crop
of the full-size image with random crop anchor. This way the model is discouraged from relying on
a rigid camera-to-base transformation which cannot be assumed across several robots. Instead, the
policy is forced to learn about the presence and the view of the gripper and impact of the actions in
the environment, which is critical for the emergence of closed-loop self-corrective behaviours. We
also apply image augmentation. The brightness, contrast, and saturation are adjusted by sampling
uniformly from [ 0:125;0:125];[0:5;1:5], and [0:5;1:5]respectively. To stay consistent, the same
augmentation is applied to the images in the current state sand next state s0. Random cropping and
image augmentation is only done at train time. At inference time, no augmentation is used and we
always crop to the center 472x472 square of the image.
18
D.2 Action Space
The agent’s action comprises a gripper pose displacement, and an open/close command. The
gripper pose displacement is a difference between the current pose and the desired pose in Cartesian
space, encoded as translation tt2R3, and vertical rotation encoded via a sine-cosine encoding
rt2R2. A gripper open/close command is encoded as one-hot vector [gclose;t;gopen;t]2f0;1g2. In
addition, as this is an episodic task with a ﬁnite horizon, our agent has to decide when to terminate.
For a baseline policy, we implement a heuristic stopping criterion that triggers when the arm is
holding an object above a threshold height. Such a heuristic is task-speciﬁc and might bias learning
in a sub-optimal way. Thus, we introduce an additional action component etwhich allows our
policy to learn a stopping criterion and decide when to terminate autonomously. The full action is
deﬁned as at= (tt;rt;gclose;t;gopen;t;et).
D.3 Reward Function
The agent is given a reward of 1 at the end of an episode if it has successfully grasped an object
from the bin. In all other cases the reward is 0. In order to detect a successful grasp we use an image
subtraction test, see Fig. 12. An image of the scene is captured after the grasp attempt with the arm
moved out of camera view. Then a second image is taken after attempting to drop the grasped object
into the bin. If no object was grasped, these two images would be identical. Otherwise, if an object
was picked up, certain pixels in the two images will be different. A grasp is labeled success if the
image subtraction is above a threshold.
Figure 12: Grasp success is determined by subtracting
images before an object is dropped into the bin (left)
and after it was dropped (right).Because we use a simple image subtraction test
to compute the reward, in practice the labeling
is not perfect. We analyzed the failed grasps
from the model that reaches 96% grasp suc-
cess, and discovered that out of 28 misgrasps, 3
were actually successful grasps that have been
classiﬁed improperly by our image subtraction
test. Our background subtraction test might not
detect small objects, making it vulnerable to
false negative registrations. This shows that our
learning algorithm can train a very good policy even with a small noise in the reward function.
D.4 Grasp execution and termination condition
Algorithm 1 Grasping control-loop
1: Pick a policy policy .
2: Initialize a robot .
3:while step < N and not terminate episode do
4: s=robot .CaptureState()
5: a=policy .SelectAction( s)
6: robot .ExecuteCommand( a)
7: terminate episode =efTermination action eis either learned or decided heuristically. g
8: r = robot .ReceiveReward()
9: emit( s;a;r)
10:end while
With state, action and reward deﬁned in the sections above, we now describe the control-loop ex-
ecuted on our robots. As described in Algorithm 1 we control our manipulator by closing a loop
around visual input and gripper commands. At the end of an episode we detect grasp success and
return the sequence of state-action pairs to be fed back into the learning pipeline or stored ofﬂine.
Depending on the executed policy , our termination action eis either learned or decided heuristically
as we discuss below.
19
Conv(64, 6, 2)MaxPool(3)Conv(64, 5, 1)MaxPool(3)FC(64)
FC(64)Sigmoid Grasping Value Function
Cartesian Vector(472, 472, 3)MaxPool(2)
Conv(64, 3, 1) Repeat x6Conv(64, 3, 1)
Repeat x6Reshape(1,1,64)
FC(64)
SumGripper Rotation
Close GripperOpen Gripper
Gripper Open?Qθ(s,a)
 +Repeat x3Repeat x2
Log Loss
arg max
a/primeQ¯θ(s/prime,a/prime)Target Value Function
Terminate Episodet
ar
gclosegopen
e
sFC(256)
Gripper Heightgaperture
gheightItFigure 13: The architecture of grasping Q-Function. The input image is processed by a stack of convolutional
layers before the introduction of the action and vector-valued state variables (gripper status and height). These
are processed by several fully connected layers, tiled over the width and height dimension of the convolutional
map, and added to it. The resulting convolutional map is further processed by a number of convolutional layers
until the output. The output is gated through a sigmoid, such that our Q-values are always in the range [0;1].
Scripted termination condition Initial experiments used a heuristic termination condition to de-
termine when the policy is done. The heuristic detects when the gripper is holding an object, and
the policy is continuing to command upward actions after it has passed a height threshold.
Algorithm 2 Scripted termination condition
1: termination height = 0.13
2: s = robot.GetState()
3: gripper height = s.height ofgripper
4: gripper closed = s.gripper status=’CLOSED’
5: a = robot.GetAction(s)
6: next action height = a.translation.z
7:ifgripper closed and gripper height > termination height and next action height >
gripper height then
8: terminate = True
9:else
10: terminate = False
11:end if
Learned termination condition In principle, a policy may use the camera image to determine if
it has successfully grasped and raised an object. It may inform such knowledge through a discrete
termination action. To learn the termination action, the reward structure must be slightly changed,
reward = 1 is assigned when graspsuccess =True and gripper termination height >
threshold . This enforces the policy to indicate episode termination only after the gripper lifts the
object, which makes it easier to provide visual feedback for robust grasps; objects will fall out of a
brittle grasp during the lifting process, and terminating the grasp after the object falls gives richer
negative examples.
E Q-Function Neural Network Architecture
We model the Q-function as a large deep neural network whose architecture, shown in Figure 13,
is inspired by the one presented in [27]. The network takes the monocular RGB image component
of the state sas input, and processes it with 7 convolutional layers. We transform actions aand
additional state features ( gaperture ,gheight) with fully-connected layers, then merge them with visual
features by broadcasted element-wise addition. After fusing state and action representations, the Q
valueQ(s;a)is modeled by 9 more convolution layers followed by two fully-connected layers.
20
Figure 14: Architecture of the QT-Opt distributed reinforcement learning algorithm.
Each convolution and fully-connected layer uses batch normalization [41] and the ReLU nonlinear-
ity. The value function handles mixtures of discrete actions (open, close, terminate) and continuous
actions (Cartesian vector and gripper rotation), making the same state-action space amenable to
learning future tasks like placing and stacking. In Table 2, we demonstrate empirically that the
model performs better when provided with redundant state representations ( gaperture ,gheight). All
weights are initialized with truncated normal random variables ( =:01) and L2-regularized with a
coefﬁcient of 7e 5. Models are trained with SGD with momentum, using learning rate 0:0001 and
momentum 0:9.
F QT-Opt Distributed Reinforcement Learning System Design
Prior works [42, 43] have explored new reinforcement learning algorithms that allow compute par-
allelization to accelerate training. We propose a parallel and distributed learning algorithm, inspired
by [44], that can scale easily on cloud-based infrastructures. Fig. 14 is a diagram of the full dis-
tributed system.
This distributed design of our QT-Opt algorithm was important for several reasons:
(a) We use high-resolution images. Trying to store all transitions in the memory of a single ma-
chine is infeasible. Thus we employ a distributed replay buffer, which lets us store hundreds of
thousands of transitions across several machines.
(b) The Q-network is quite large, and distributing training across multiple GPUs drastically in-
creases research velocity by reducing time to convergence. Similarly, in order to support large
scale simulated experiments, the design has to support running hundreds of simulated robots
that cannot ﬁt on a single machine.
(c) Decoupling training jobs from data generation jobs allows us to treat training as data-agnostic,
making it easy to switch between simulated data, off-policy real data, and on-policy real data. It
also lets us scale the speed of training and data generation independently.
Similar to [45], our distributed replay buffer is shared across all agents, although we do not use
prioritized replay. We distribute training across 10 GPUs, using asynchronous SGD with momentum
as proposed by [46]. Models were trained using TensorFlow [47]. This system allows us to train the
Q-function at 40 steps per second with a batch size of 32 across 10 NVIDIA P100 GPUs.
F.1 Online Training
Online agents (real or simulated robots) collect data from the environment. The policy used is the
Polyak averaged weights Q1(s;a)and the weights are updated every 10 minutes. That data is
pushed to a distributed replay buffer, which we call the “online buffer”. The data is also persisted to
disk for future ofﬂine training.
21
F.2 Ofﬂine Training from Logs
To support ofﬂine training, we run a log replay job. This job reads data sequentially from disk for
efﬁciency reasons. It replays saved episodes as if an online agent had collected that data. This lets
us seamlessly merge off-policy data with on-policy data collected by online agents as described in
Appendix F.3.
Ofﬂine data comes from all previously run experiments. In total, we collected 580k grasps of ofﬂine
data, which took 4 terabytes of disk space. In fully off-policy training, we can train the policy
by loading all data with the log replay job, letting us train without having to interact with the real
environment.
Despite the scale of the distributed replay buffer, we still can’t ﬁt the entire dataset into memory. In
order to be able to visit each datapoint uniformly, we keep continuously running the Log Replay to
refresh the in-memory data residing in the Replay Buffer. In practice we found that running at least
100 Log Replay jobs was important to mitigate correlations between consecutive episodes and drive
sufﬁciently diverse data to the Replay Buffer.
F.3 Online Joint Finetuning After Ofﬂine Training
In practice, we begin with off-policy training to initialize a good policy, and then switch to on-
policy joint ﬁnetuning. To do so, we ﬁrst train fully off-policy by using the Log Replay job to replay
episodes from prior experiments. After training off-policy for enough time, we restart QT-Opt,
training with a mix of on-policy and off-policy data. We train off-policy for 5M to 15M steps.
Real on-policy data is generated by 7 KUKA LBR IIWA robot arms where the weights of the policy
Q1(s;a)are updated every 10 minutes. Compared to the ofﬂine dataset, the rate of on-policy data
production is much lower and the data has less visual diversity. However, the on-policy data also
contains real-world interactions that illustrate the faults in the current policy. To avoid overﬁtting to
the initially scarce on-policy data, we gradually ramp up the fraction of on-policy data from 1% to
50% over the ﬁrst 1M gradient update steps of joint ﬁnetuning training.
Since the real robots can stop unexpectedly (e.g., due to hardware faults), data collection can be
sporadic, potentially with delays of hours or more if a fault occurs without any operator present.
This can unexpectedly cause a signiﬁcant reduction in the rate of data collection. To mitigate this,
on-policy training is also gated by a training balancer , which enforces a ﬁxed ratio between the
number of joint ﬁnetuning gradient update steps and number of on-policy transitions collected. The
ratio was deﬁned relative to the speed of the GPUs and of the robots, which changed over time. We
did not tune this ratio very carefully, and in practice the ratio ranged from 6:1 to 11:1.
F.4 Distributed Bellman Update
To stabilize deep Q-Learning, we use a target network, as discussed in Section 4. Since target net-
works parameters typically lag behind the online network when computing TD error, the Bellman
backup can actually be performed asynchronously in a separate process. We propose a novel algo-
rithm that computes r(s;a) +V(s0)in parallel on separate CPU machines, storing the output of
those computations in an additional buffer named “train” in our distributed replay buffer. We call
this job the Bellman updater, and have been able to scale this computation up to 1,000 machines
using around 14k cores.
Letbe the parameters of the current Q-network, be the parameters of the target Q-network, and
p(s;a;s)be the distribution of transitions in the replay buffer. As discussed in 4.1, our Bellman
backup is formulated as:
E() =E(s;a;s0)p(s;a;s0)[D(Q(s;a);r(s;a) +V(s0))]:
Note that because we use several Bellman updater replicas, each replica will load a new target
network at different times. All replicas push the Bellman backup to the shared replay buffer in the
“train buffer”. This makes our target Q-values effectively generated by an ensemble of recent target
22
networks, sampled from an implicit distribution Rt. Expanding the clipped Double DQN estimation
of value gives the following objective:
E() =E(s;a;s0)p(s;a;s0)h
E(1;2)Rt(1;2)
D 
Q(s;a);r(s;a) +V1;2(s0)i
(2)
whereV1;2(s0)is estimated using clipped Double DQN:
V1;2(s0) = min
i=1;2Qi(s0;arg max
a0Q1(s0;a0))
Even if a Q-function estimator is unbiased, variance in TD error estimates are converted into over-
estimation bias during the Bellman backup (via the max operator). We hypothesize that ensembling
via a distribution of lagging target networks stabilizes training by reducing the variance (and thereby
reduces bias in target values). We also decrease overestimation bias by using Clipped Double-
Q Learning and a damped discount factor of =:9. We found this training to be stable and
reproducible. The target network Q1is computed by doing a Polyak averaging [32] with a decay
factor of 0:9999 , whileQ2is lagged on average by about 6000 gradient steps. The exact amount of
delay varies because of the asynchronous nature of the system.
F.5 Distributed Replay Buffer
The distributed replay buffer supports having named replay buffers. We create three named buffers:
“online buffer” holds online data, “ofﬂine buffer” holds ofﬂine data, and “train buffer” stores Q-
targets computed by the Bellman updater. The replay buffer interface supports weighted sampling
from the named buffers, which is useful when doing on-policy joint ﬁnetuning. The distributed
replay buffer is spread over 6 workers, which each contain 50ktransitions, totalling 650k= 300k
transitions. All buffers are FIFO buffers where old values are removed to make space for new ones
if the buffer is full.
23